THIEVES 
IN THE NIGHT 

Chronicle of an Experiment 


BY 

ARTHUR KOESTLER 


But the day of the Lord will come as a thief 
in the night. (II p e ter in, 10) 


LONDON 

MACMILLAN & CO. LTD 

1946 



COPYRIGHT 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 



The characters in this chronicle are fictitious . The 
happenings are not . It is dedicated to the memory 
of Vladimir Jaboti?isky 9 and to my friends in the 
Hebrew Communes of Galilee : Jonah and Sarah 
of Ain Hashofeth ; Loebl and Guetig of Khefzibah; 
Teddy and Tamar of Ain Geb. 

JerusaletHy 1945 


V 




CONTENTS 


The First Day (1937) page 1 

More Days (1938) 79 

Days of Wrath (1939) 189 

The Day of Visitation (1939) 3°5 

Thievfs in the Night (1939) 337 


Vll 




THE FIRST DAY 
C 1 937) 


We shake off the old life which has gi own rancid on us, 
and start from the beginning We don’t want to change 
and we don’t want to improve, we want to begin from 
the beginning ” 

A D Gordon, Galilean pioneer 




THE FIRST DAY (1937) 

1 

“ If I get killed to-day, it won’t be by falling off the top of 
a truck,” Joseph thought, digging his fingers into the tarred 
canvas cover of the swaying and lurching vehicle. He lay 
on his back, with arms spread out, a horizontally crucified 
figure on a rocking hearse under the stars. The truck’s load 
was piled so high that Joseph and his friends travelled about 
five yards above ground, heaving from one side to the other 
on the bumpy rock-bed of the wadi ; it felt as if the whole 
black mammoth of a truck might topple over at any minute. 

As he peered down over the edge of the canvas, Joseph 
was reminded of the sensation of dizzy height he had 
experienced as a small child when, for the first time, he had 
been lifted to the back of a horse. The engine roared and 
the top-heavy truck jolted in first gear over the rocks of the 
dried-up stream-bed ; it stalled ; it started again with a 
plaintive whine. In front of them the long, stretched-out 
line of the other trucks in the convoy crept haltingly forward 
on the twisted course of the wadi, a caravan of swaying, dark 
clumsy giants on wheels. The moon was not due to rise 
for another hour, but there was a brilliant display of stars ; 
the Great Bear curiously sprawling on its back and the Milky 
Way clustered into one broad luminous scar across the dark 
sky-tissue. All the trucks in the convoy had dimmed their 
headlights. The pallid rocks lay quiet in their archaic 
slumber. The rear of the convoy, spread over a mile, 
followed behind them as a moving garland of sparks in the 
hostile night. 

The truck heeled over at almost thirty degrees and from 
the other end of the canvas came a delighted squeak from 
Dina. Joseph could only see her by either twisting his neck 
until his vertebrae seemed to crack, or by heaving his body 
into an arch pivoting on the top of his head, so that he looked 

3 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


4 

at the world upside down. But to see Dina profiled against 
the starlight was worth the effort. She laughed, clutching 
the canvas with both hands. 

“ Like that you look even more comic than usual.” 

Her Hebrew had the right guttural inflection which 
Joseph envied and could not imitate. From the front came 
Simeon’s dry authoritative voice : 

“ Be silent, you two.” 

“ And why ? ” cried Dina. “ Is this a funeral ? ” 

“ Yell your head off if you like,” said Simeon impatiently. 
He was sitting stiffly upright on the front edge of the canvas, 
with his knees pulled up in front. 

“ I will,” cried Dina. “ Let them know that we are 
coming. They will know by now anyway. Let them know. 
We — are — off to — Gal-il-ee.” 

Her voice rose and slipped into the familiar tune, the song 
of the Galilean pioneers : 

El yivneh ha-galil , 

An’u yvvrCu ha-galil. . . . 

God will rebuild Galilee, 

We shall rebuild Galilee, 

We are off to Galilee, 

We will rebuild Galilee. . . . 

Joseph joined in, singing with his head still upside-down, 
but a vicious jolt of the truck threw him on one side and made 
him grab at the canvas. Dina’s voice too had broken off. 

“ Are you all right ? ” he asked. 

“ Yes,” she said, slightly subdued by the shock. But a 
moment later she cried excitedly : 

“ Look ! Oh, look ! Are they ours ? ” 

Far off ahead of them and slightly to the left a spark had 
begun to blink at regular intervals. It was only slightly 
brighter than the biggest stars, but its colour was red and its 
flashes and effacements had an unmistakable rhythm and 
meaning. It seemed suspended in the air, but by straining 
one’s eyes one could make out the pallid, almost transparent 
silhouette of the hill. 



THE FIRST DAY 


IX 


His Hebrew was rather bumpy. He lined them up along 
the wall dividing the dining-hall from the kitchen. 

“ The lorries will be here in twenty minutes,” he said, 
rolling himself a cigarette. “ Most of you know what it’s 
all about. The land which we are going to occupy, about 
fifteen hundred acres, was bought by our National Fund 
several years ago from an absentee Arab landowner named 
Zaid Effendi el Mussa, who lives in Beirut and has never seen 
it. It consists of a hill on which the new settlement, Ezra's 
Tower, will be erected, of the valley surrounding it and some 
pastures on near-by slopes. The hill is a mess of rocks and 
has not seen a plough for the last thousand years, but there 
are traces of ancient terracing dating back to our days. In 
the valley a few fields were worked by Arab tenants of Zaid 
Effendi’s, who live in the neighbouring village of Rfar 
Tabiyeh. They have been paid compensation amounting to 
about three times the value of the land so that they were 
able to buy better plots on the other side of their village ; 
one of them has even built himself an ice factory in Jaffa. 

“ Then there is a Beduin tribe which, without Zaid 
Effendi’s knowledge, used to graze their camels and sheep 
each spring on the pastures. Their Sheikh has been paid 
compensation. When all this was settled, the villagers of 
Kfar Tabiyeh suddenly remembered that part of the hill 
did not belong to Zaid, but was masha'a land, that is 
communal property of the village. This part consists of 
a strip about eighty yards in width running straight to 
the top of the hill and cutting it in two. According to 
law masha'a land can only be sold with the consent of all 
members of the village. Kfar Tabiyeh has 563 souls 
distributed over eleven hamulles or clans. The elders of 
each clan had to be bribed separately, and the thumb- 
prints of each of the 563 members obtained, including the 
babes' and village idiot's. Three villagers had emigrated 
years ago to Syria ; they had to be traced and bribed. 
Two were in prison, two had died abroad, but there was 
no documentary proof of their deaths ; it had to be 
obtained. When all was finished, each square foot of arid 



4 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

at the world upside down. But to see Dina profiled against 
the starlight was worth the effort. She laughed, clutching 
the canvas with both hands. 

“ Like that you look even more comic than usual.” 

Her Hebrew had the right guttural inflection which 
Joseph envied and could not imitate. From the front came 
Simeon’s dry authoritative voice : 

“ Be silent, you two.” 

“ And why ? ” cried Dina. “ Is this a funeral ? ” 

“ Yell your head off if you like,” said Simeon impatiently. 
He was sitting stiffly upright on the front edge of the canvas, 
with his knees pulled up in front. 

“ I will,” cried Dina. “ Let them know that we are 
coming. They will know by now anyway. Let them know. 
We — are — off to — Gal-il-ee.” 

Her voice rose and slipped into the familiar tune, the song 
of the Galilean pioneers : 

El yivneh ha-galil, 

An’u yvon’u ha-galil. . . . 

God will rebuild Galilee, 

We shall rebuild Galilee, 

We are off to Galilee, 

We will rebuild Galilee. . . . 

Joseph joined in, singing with his head still upside-down, 
but a vicious jolt of the truck threw him on one side and made 
him grab at the canvas. Dina’s voice too had broken off. 

“ Are you all right ? ” he asked. 

“ Yes,” she said, slightly subdued by the shock. But a 
moment later she cried excitedly : 

“ Look ! Oh, look ! Are they ours ? ” 

Far off ahead of them and slightly to the left a spark had 
begun to blink at regular intervals. It was only slightly 
brighter than the biggest stars, but its colour was red and its 
flashes and effacements had an unmistakable rhythm and 
meaning. It seemed suspended in the air, but by straining 
one’s eyes one could make out the pallid, almost transparent 
silhouette of the hill. 



THE FIRST DAY 


7 

on top of a hill, surrounded by Arab villages, with no other 
Hebrew settlement for miles and a malaria swamp thrown 
in into the bargain. But when a Jew returns to this land 
and sees a stone and says, This stone is mine, then something 
snaps in him which has been tense for two thousand years. 

He found that his right arm had gone to sleep and began 
to wave it wildly through the air. 

* Oh, rot,’ he told himself. * Perhaps this whole idea 
of the Return is a romantic stunt. If I am killed I shall not 
even know whether I die in a tragedy or in a farce. . . . 
But whichever it is, that feeling about the Place is real ; it 
is the most real thing I have ever felt. Funny. We shall 
have to think this out, if there is time left/ 

He twisted his head to look at Dina. Dina too was 
lying on her back, at right angles to him, some distance 
away. She had folded her arms under her neck ; her profile 
had softened in the starlight, with lips slightly parted in an 
unconscious smile. She too was thinking of the Place. She 
had only seen it once, more than a year ago, before it had 
been bought from the Arab villagers by the National Fund. 
She did not even remember exactly which hill it was — they 
all looked so much alike, the hills of Galilee, softly curved 
like hips or breasts, but with their stone-ribs sticking out 
since the flesh, the fat red earth, had been carried away by 
rain and wind during the centuries of neglect. No, she 
could not remember it very clearly, but anyway it was a 
lovely hill and they were going to restore it to its ancient 
abundance. They would feed the starved earth with phos- 
phates and lime, and remove the festering sore of the swamp, 
and cover the hill’s nakedness with a fur of trees and a lace- 
work of terraces. There will be figs and olives, and pepper 
and laurel. And poppies and cyclamen, sunflowers and roses 
of Sharon. First we will build the stockade, the watchtower 
and the tents, the shower-bath, the dining-hut and the 
kitchen. Then the metal road, the cowshed, the sheep- 
pen and the children’s house. Then the living quarters for 
ourselves. In two years from now we shall have a dining- 
hall in concrete, a library, reading-room, swimming-pool and 



8 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

open-air stage. It will be a lovely place and it will be called 
Ezra’s Tower and it will efface the thing to forget, and I 
shall get over it and have a child and another child and 
they will have no things to forget. And maybe they will 
be Reuben’s and maybe they will be Joseph’s ; and maybe 
they will be Abel’s and maybe they will be Joseph’s. . . . 
Oh, I love them all, even Simeon, I love them all, I love the 
Place, I love the stones, I love the stars. . . . 

Simeon sat erect on the foremost edge of the canvas, his 
elbows on his knees ; he was thinking of a passage in Isaiah 
he had come across by one of those hazards which he 
believed not to be hazards, the night before : The wilderness 
and the solitary place shall be glad for them ; and the desert 
shall rejoice . We are coming, he whispered to himself ; we 
are coming, we are back. 

Joseph began to chuckle. 

“ What is the matter, you fool ? ” asked Dina, sitting up. 

“ I’ll tell you when we arrive.” 

“ Tell me now.” 

4 4 It might upset you,” said Joseph, giggling irrepressibly. 

“ Nothing can upset me if this truck doesn’t turn over.” 

“ But that is just the point ! Look ...” 

He grabbed her hand and led it with his own to the edge 
of the canvas. “ Do you feel something ? ” 

“Wood. Crates.” 

“ Yes, but I know these particular crates, I have only to feel 
round their edge. They are those with our home-made eggs. ’ ’ 

Dina too began to giggle, though somewhat forcedly. 
Nobody had great confidence in their self-made illegal hand 
grenades ; they had a reputation of going off at the wrong 
moment. “ Typically Jewish grenades, over-sensitive and 
neurotic,” an English Police officer had called them. 

“ You know,” said Joseph mirthfully, “ they are packed 
in sawdust like real eggs. And you are brooding over them 
like a hen waiting for the chicks to come out.” 

A jolt of the truck bumped their heads together. “ Oh, 
Moses our Rabbi,” said Dina, “ I wish you hadn’t told me.’> 



THE FIRST DAY 


9 

The invisible driver underneath them had turned the 
headlights full on. The white beam quivered on the desolate, 
stone-littered earth. 

I wish you two could be quiet for a minute, ” said 
Simeon, without turning his head. 44 We are almost there.” 


2 

So far, in a seemingly leisurely, almost casual way, every- 
thing had gone according to plan. 

Three hours earlier, at i A.M., the forty boys of the 
Defence Squad, who were to form the vanguard, had 
assembled in the communal dining-hut of Gan Tamar, the 
old settlement from where the expedition was to start. In 
the large, vaulted, empty dining-hall the boys looked very 
young, awkward and sleepy. They were mostly under 
nineteen, born in the country, sons and grandsons of the first 
settlers from Petakh Tikwah, Rishon le Zion, Metullah, 
Nahalal. Hebrew for them was the native tongue, not a 
precariously acquired art ; the Country their country, 
neither promise nor fulfilment. Europe for them was a 
legend of glamour and frightfulness, the new Babylon, land 
of exile where their elders sat by the rivers and wept. They 
were mostly blond, freckled, broad-featured, heavy-boned 
and clumsy ; farmers' sons, peasant lads, unjewish-looking 
and slightly dull. They were haunted by no memories and 
had nothing to forget. They had no ancient curse upon 
them and no hysterical hopes ; they had the peasant's love 
for the land, the schoolboy's patriotism, the self-righteousness 
of a very young nation. They were Sabras — nicknamed 
after the thorny, rather tasteless fruit of the cactus, grown on 
arid earth, tough, hard-living, scant. 

There was a sprinkling of Europeans among them, new 
immigrants from Babylon. They had gone through the hard, 
ascetic training of Hekhaluz and Hashomer Hatzair, youth 
movements which united the fervour of a religious order 

B 



10 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

with the dogmatism of a socialist debating club. Their faces 
were darker, narrower, keener ; already they bore the stigma 
of the things to forget. It was there in the sharper bend of 
the nasal bone, the bitter sensuousness of fleshier lips, the 
knowing look in moister eyes. They looked nervous and 
overstrung amidst the phlegmatic and sturdy Sabras ; more 
enthusiastic and less reliable. 

They all sat round the raw deal tables of the dining-hall, 
heavy with sleep and silent. The naked bulbs suspended on 
wires from the ceiling gave a bleak, cheerless light ; the 
chipped salt-cellars and oil cruets formed pointless little 
oases on the empty communal tables. About half of them 
wore the uniform of the Auxiliary Settlement Police — 
khaki tunics which were mostly too big for them, and pic- 
turesque Bersaglieri hats which made their faces look even 
more adolescent. The others, who wore no uniform, were a 
section of the Haganah — the illegal self-defence organisa- 
tion whose members, when caught defending a Hebrew 
settlement, were sent to jail together with the aggressors. 

At last Bauman, the leader of the detachment, arrived. 
He wore riding breeches and a black leather jacket — a relic 
from the street-fighting in Vienna in 1934, when the 
malignant dwarf Dollfuss had ordered his field guns to fire 
point-blank into the balconies, lined with geranium-boxes 
and drying linen, of the workers’ tenements in Floridsdorf, 
crossing himself after each salvo. Bauman had received his 
leather jacket and his illegal but thorough military training 
in the ranks of the Schutzbund ; he had the round, jovial 
face of a Viennese baker’s boy ; only in the rare moments 
when he was tired or angry did it reveal the imprint of the 
things to forget. In his case there were two : the fact that 
his people had happened to live behind one of those little 
balconies with the geranium-boxes ; and the warm, moist 
feeling on his face of the spittle of a humorous jailer in the 
prison of Graz every morning at six o’clock when breakfast 
was doled out in the cells. 

“ Well, you lazy bums,” Bauman said, " get up ; atten- 
tion, stand over there.” 



THE FIRST DAY 


IX 


His Hebrew was rather bumpy. He lined them up along 
the wall dividing the dining-hall from the kitchen. 

“ The lorries will be here in twenty minutes, ” he said, 
rolling himself a cigarette. “ Most of you know what it’s 
all about. The land which we are going to occupy, about 
fifteen hundred acres, was bought by our National Fund 
several years ago from an absentee Arab landowner named 
Zaid Effendi el Mussa, who lives in Beirut and has never seen 
it. It consists of a hill on which the new settlement, Ezra’s 
Tower, will be erected, of the valley surrounding it and some 
pastures on near-by slopes. The hill is a mess of rocks and 
has not seen a plough for the last thousand years, but there 
are traces of ancient terracing dating back to our days. In 
the valley a few fields were worked by Arab tenants of Zaid 
Effendi’s, who live in the neighbouring village of Kfar 
Tabiyeh. They have been paid compensation amounting to 
about three times the value of the land so that they were 
able to buy better plots on the other side of their village ; 
one of them has even built himself an ice factory in Jaffa. 

“ Then there is a Beduin tribe which, without Zaid 
Effendi’s knowledge, used to graze their camels and sheep 
each spring on the pastures. Their Sheikh has been paid 
compensation. When all this was settled, the villagers of 
Kfar Tabiyeh suddenly remembered that part of the hill 
did not belong to Zaid, but was masha'a land, that is 
communal property of the village. This part consists of 
a strip about eighty yards in width running straight to 
the top of the hill and cutting it in two. According to 
law masha'a land can only be sold with the consent of all 
members of the village. Kfar Tabiyeh has 563 souls 
distributed over eleven hamulles or clans. The elders of 
each clan had to be bribed separately, and the thumb- 
prints of each of the 563 members obtained, including the 
babes’ and village idiot’s. Three villagers had emigrated 
years ago to Syria ; they had to be traced and bribed. 
Two were in prison, two had died abroad, but there was 
no documentary proof of their deaths ; it had to be 
obtained. When all was finished, each square foot of arid 



12 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

rock had cost the National Fund about the price of a square 
foot in the business centres of London or New York. . . .” 

He threw his cigarette away and wiped his right cheek 
with the palm of his hand. It was a habit which originated 
from his experience with the humorous jailer in Graz. 

“ It took two years to finish these little formalities. 
When they were finished, the Arab rebellion broke out. The 
first attempt to take possession of the place failed. The 
prospective settlers were received with a hail of stones from 
the villagers of Kfar Tabiyeh and had to give up. At the 
second attempt, undertaken in greater strength, they were 
shot at and lost two men. That was three months ago. You 
are making to-day the third attempt, and this time we shall 
succeed. By to-night the stockade, the watch-tower and the 
first living-huts will have been erected on the hill. 

4 4 Our detachment is going to occupy the site before 
dawn. A second detachment will accompany the convoy of 
the settlers which will start two hours later. The Arabs will 
not know before daybreak. Trouble during the day is 
unlikely. The critical time will be the first few nights. But 
by then the Place will be fortified. 

44 Some of our cautious big-heads in Jerusalem wanted 
us to wait for quieter times. The place is isolated, the next 
Hebrew settlement eleven miles away and there is no road ; 
it is surrounded by Arab villages ; it is close to the Syrian 
frontier from which the rebels infiltrate. These are precisely 
the reasons why we have decided not to wait. Once the 
Arabs understand that they cannot prevent us from exer- 
cising our rights, they will come to terms with us. If they 
see signs of weakness and hesitation, they will first fleece us 
and then drown us in the sea. This is why Ezra’s Tower 
has to stand by to-night. — That’s all. We have five minutes 
left ; single file into the kitchen for coffee.” 

At i.zo a.m. Bauman and the forty boys got into three 
lorries and drove with dimmed headlights out through the 
gates of the settlement. 



THE FIRST DAY 


13 


5 

For a while the huge dining-hall remained empty in the 
blaze of its electric lights. Lazy night insects flew from the 
darkness into the close wire-netting of the windows. Cock- 
roaches crept busily over the cement flooring, and now and 
then a rat made a dash across the white surface. 

About 2 a . m . Misha, the night watchman, came in to 
fetch hot water from the kitchen boiler for a glass of tea. 
Then he went off to wake the cooks and dining-hall orderlies. 
They began to drift in about a quarter of an hour later, their 
faces still swollen with sleep but nervously alert from the 
shock of the cold shower-bath. They had got up almost 
three hours before their usual time to provide breakfast for 
the new settlers who were to depart in an hour. The cooks 
disappeared into the kitchen ; the orderly girls, in shorts and 
khaki shirts, began methodically to lay the tables. 

At 2.30 a . m . Dov and Jonah stamped in in their rubber 
gumboots. They were in charge of the cowshed and started 
work half an hour before milking began. Leah, one of the 
orderlies, put a big wooden bowl of salad before them, mixed 
of tomatoes, radishes, cucumber, spring onions and olives, 
the whole seasoned with lemon and olive oil. They chewed 
it in silence, between bites from thick chunks of bread. Dov 
was blond, with a narrow face and blue, short-sighted eyes ; 
his frail figure looked lost in the heavy oilskin overalls like 
in a diving suit. He was twenty-five, came from Prague, 
and was one of the founders of the Commune of Gan Tamar. 
Though he had been in charge of the cowshed for the last 
three years, he still couldn’t get accustomed to getting up 
before dawn ; it was torture crystallised into routine. To 
go to bed at nine in the evening, as he was supposed to do, 
would have meant exclusion from the Commune’s social 
life — the meetings, lectures, discussions and the orchestra 
in which he played the ’cello. He also reviewed once a 
fortnight modern poetry for the Jerusalem Mail , and was 
translating Rilke into Hebrew. 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


14 

“ Listen," he said to Jonah after five minutes of silent 
chewing, “ I would like to go out with the convoy of the 
new ones/’ 

“ Tov” said Jonah, “ all right/* 

“ I shall be back to-night.** 

“ Tovr 

“ Do you think you can manage alone ? *’ 

“ Yes.** 

“ Miriam is due to calve some time to-day.** 

“ Yes.’* 

Jonah was not yet a member of the Commune ; he had 
arrived three months ago from Latvia and worked as a proba- 
tioner. He was a good worker, slow and reliable. He beat 
all records in taciturnity ; Dov could not remember having 
heard him utter one complete sentence. He was rather a 
puzzle to the community of Gan Tamar, who couldn't make 
up their minds whether to regard him as a philosopher or 
a moron. 

Leah brought them white cheese, porridge and tea. She 
lingered at the table, trying to catch Dov's veiled, sleepy eyes. 

“ Going out with them to the new place ? " she asked, 
propping her elbows on the table beside him. 

Dov nodded. 

“ They are quite nice kids, the new ones," she said, in a 
tone which implied : But we, the old-timers, were of course 
of a different sort. Leah too had lived in the Commune of 
Gan Tamar ever since its beginnings seven years ago. She 
was about Dov’s age but looked older. Her dark, sharp- 
featured Semitic face was not without beauty, but it had 
matured precociously and wilted early, as happened to many 
of the girls in the Communes. She wore tight khaki shorts 
and socks like all the others, and her athletic thighs were 
curiously dissonant with her unyoung face. 

“ They will have a hard time at first," she said, and 
added with a little shudder : “ God, I wouldn’t start again 
at the beginning." 

“ I don’t know," said Dov, considering the matter while 
he went on chewing bread thickly spread with cheese. 



THE FIRST DAY 


15 

Leah was always fascinated by the contrast between his 
dreamy look and enormous appetite. They both thought of 
the hardships of the first years — the physical exhaustion 
caused by the unaccustomed work, the malaria and typhus ; 
the heat, the irksome discomfort of tent life with no water, 
no lavatories, no sanitation ; the dirt, the mud, the mos- 
quitoes and sand-flies. . . . Looking back from the relative 
comforts of Gan Tamar in its seventh year of existence, 
those early pioneer days appeared like a heroic nightmare. 

“ I don’t know,” said Dov in his slow way. “ We were 
all different then. We used to dance a lot of horra. . . .” 

“ There was always something to celebrate,” said Leah. 
“ The first calf. The first crop. The first tractor. The first 
baby. The water pump. The diesel. The electric 
light. ...” 

Her mood, always narrowly balanced between extremes, 
had already transformed the nightmare into romance. She 
leaned with her elbow on Dov’s shoulder. “ Shall I get you 
another plate of porridge ? ” she asked. 

He shook his head. “ I must be going,” he said, rising 
from the table. Followed by Jonah, he tramped out of the 
dining-hall and towards the cowshed, his flapping oilskin 
overalls enveloping him in stable-smell and rusticity. 

There was an interlude of a few minutes which gave the 
orderlies time to finish their preparations. The long deal 
tables became a more cheerful sight as they were covered 
with bowls of salad, heaps of thick-sliced bread, stone mugs, 
bakelite plates and cutlery. The first people arrived at a 
quarter to three, and a few minutes later the hundred and 
fifty men and women who were to leave with the convoy 
had occupied their seats. 

There were eight seats to each table, four on each of the 
wooden forms alongside ; according to custom they were 
filled up in order of arrival from the kitchen end of the hall 
towards the entrance, without preference to place or com- 
pany ; a custom which eased the work of the orderlies and 
at the same time served as a kind of social cement-mixer, 



16 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

reshuffling the members of the Commune three times a day. 

This, however, was an unusual crowd : the twenty-five 
young people who were to become the future settlers of 
Ezra’s Tower, and the hundred and twenty Helpers who 
were to assist them in erecting the fortified camp before 
sunset, and to return by the end of the first day. The 
Helpers were volunteers who had come from the older 
Communes of Judaea, the Samarian coast, the Valley of 
Jezreel and Upper Galilee ; most of them were well known, 
and some quite legendary figures of the early pioneer days. 
The new settlers, dispersed among their silent and hard- 
eating elders, felt awe-stricken like debutantes. Though 
theoretically they were the centre of the show, they had 
shrunk to timid insignificance ; they sat on the deal forms 
jammed between the massive Helpers who paid little atten- 
tion to them — too excited to eat and with a vague nervous 
feeling of being cheated out of the pathos and solemnity of 
this nocturnal hour to which they had looked forward 
through months and years. 

Dina, to her delight, found herself placed next to old 
Wabash from K’vuzah Dagania, oldest of the Hebrew 
Communes. Dagania stood in the Jordan Valley at the 
southern tip of the Lake of Tiberias. It had been founded in 
19 1 1 by ten boys and two girls from Romni in Poland, who 
had decided to put theory into practice and embarked on the 
first experiment in rural communism. They shared every- 
thing — earnings, food, clothes, the Arab mud huts which 
were their first living quarters, the mosquitoes and bugs, the 
night-watches against Beduins and robbers, malaria, typhoid 
and sand-fly fever ; everything except their beds, for, true 
to romantic tradition, they lived for a number of years in 
self-imposed chastity. They refused to employ hired labour, 
to handle money except in their dealings with the outside 
world, and even to mark their shirts before they went to the 
communal laundry for fear that the bug of individual 
possessiveness might start breeding in them. They regarded 
themselves as the spiritual heirs of the Essenes, who, fleeing 
from the shallow glamour of Jerusalem, had founded in the 



THE FIRST DAY 


*7 

desert their communities based on the sharing of labour and 
its fruits. They had studied the Bible, Marx and Herzl, 
and knew neither how to plant a tree nor how to milk a 
cow. The Arabs thought they were madmen, and the old 
Jewish planters in Judaea thought the Commune of the 
Twelve a bad joke and a heresy. Yet to-day Dagania's third 
generation was being brought up in the communal nurseries 
on the same mad Essene principles, while more than a 
hundred other Hebrew communal villages had spread all 
over the country, from the Mediterranean to the Dead Sea 
and from Dan to Bersheba. Some, like Yagur and Herod's 
Well, had over a thousand members, and some only fifty ; 
the older ones were prosperous, with parks, swimming-pools 
and amphitheatres, and the new ones poor, hard-living, 
squalid and ugly. Some did mixed farming, others specialised 
in exotic fruit or artificial fishponds ; but all of them had 
the same basic features : the communal dining-hall, work- 
shops and children's house ; the prohibition of hired 
labour ; the abolition of money, barter and private property ; 
the sharing of the work according to everyone's capacity 
and of its produce according to his needs. 

Dagania, which the twelve founders had named with 
self-conscious under-statement after the modest blue corn- 
flower of the Jordan Valley, was their common ancestor ; 
its members were regarded as a kind of collective aristocracy ; 
and with its giant palm trees and shaded alleys the ancient 
Commune of the Twelve had indeed an air of exclusiveness 
and patrician prosperity. 

Old Wabash, sitting next to Dina and paying no attention 
to her, looked in her opinion exactly like an oil-print of a 
biblical patriarch. His white, frizzled beard grew all round 
his face and even out of his nostrils and ears. He had blue 
eyes and wore a blue, open-necked cotton shirt and brown 
corduroy trousers, held up by a worn leather belt around his 
voluminous stomach. He ate his porridge with great applica- 
tion, and as the beard got in his way he kept tucking it back 
absentmindedly into his shirt. Dina felt thrilled by her close 
contact with one of the three survivors of the legendary 



l8 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Twelve. As he paid no attention to her, she nudged him 
after a while with her elbow : 

“ Comrade Wabash ? I wonder what you are thinking 
about.” 

He turned to her in mild surprise, his spoon suspended 
in the air. 

“ Thinking, my dear ? ” 

Joseph, who sat opposite Dina, drew his intelligent 
monkey face into a grimace. At this moment she disliked 
Joseph. She laid her hand on Wabash's arm. 

“ It was kind of you to come and help us, comrade 
Wabash.” 

He again turned to her and she couldn't help noticing 
that his eyes were watery and that his round, childish face 
looked rather weak and insignificant if one imagined the 
beard away. It was J oseph's stare that always made her realise 
such things ; that was why she disliked him sometimes. 

“ So you are one of the new pioneers, my dear ? ” old 
Wabash said. “ Good, very good. The youth carries on. 
You will continue the work that we began. . . 

Dina wished she had never spoken to old Wabash. She 
avoided looking in Joseph's direction and concentrated on 
picking out the olives in her salad-bowl. But old Wabash, 
having finished his porridge, became talkative. He spoke in 
a mild, rabbinical voice, his Hebrew betraying a strong 
yiddish accent, of the national renaissance and socialist ideal, 
the joy of rebuilding the twice-promised land and the tragedy 
of the unredeemed millions in exile. He dwelt repeatedly 
and sorrowfully on the “ masses ” and the “ millions ” and 
seemed to derive a grievous satisfaction from words like 
“ tragedy ” and “ persecution ”. But as they came mildly 
spouting out from among the oil-print curls of the white 
beard, those words seemed to Dina to lose all reality and 
meaning, to have no connection with that ulcerous tissue of 
her memory, the thing to forget. 

At last a sharp whistle signalled that the lorries were 
ready, and caused a great shuffling of boots as they all 
rose simultaneously from the tables. Dina walked in the 



THE FIRST DAY 


*9 

crowd towards the door, leaving old Wabash without a word. 
In the centre passage Joseph caught up with her ; she looked 
as if she were going to cry. 

“ The trouble was,” he said to her with a grin, “ that 
he had to keep on saying 4 milliohnim, milliohnim ’. Has 
it occurred to you that there is no word in Hebrew for 
million ? Thousand is the highest figure we can name. 
Hence he had to use the modern numeral with the old Hebrew 
plural ; that is what makes it so jarring. We should banish 
the millions from our vocabulary. Thousand is the upper 
limit of the imaginable ; above that one enters the sphere of 
abstractions.” 

They had been carried out by the crowd through the 
open door into the darkness, and waited with the others for 
their turn to embark. The trucks drove up one after another, 
their blinding headlights full on, took their load of passengers 
and jogged off on the bumpy road, across the sleeping settle- 
ment and out through the open gate. Each truck, as it 
departed, made the darkness appear vaster and deeper. As 
they stood waiting for their turn, they felt the cool morning 
breeze from the sea and the insistent silence of the starry sky. 

Next to Dina stood Simeon. He stood still, as if to 
attention, wrapped in his loneliness as in a scarf. She laid 
her hand on his arm : 

“ Let’s all climb on top of a truck. It will be lovely to 
travel on the top. . . .” 

It was just past 2 a.m. when the last truck of the convoy 
set out for the distant hill basking in the starlight, undis- 
turbed for the last thousand years, which was to become the 
Commune of Ezra’s Tower. 


4 

The Mukhtar of Kfar Tabiyeh was the only man in the 
village who slept in pyjamas. The other Mukhtar, who lived 
at the other end of the village, slept in his clothes on a mat, 
Beduin fashion. 



20 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

At 6.30 a.m. the Mukhtar was woken by Issa, his eldest 
son. Issa had been standing for quite a while next to the 
bed not daring to touch his father ; his close-set, slightly 
squinting eyes in the pale, pock-marked face were anxiously 
fixed on the enormous bulk in the blue-and-yellow striped 
pyjamas. The Mukhtar had thrown the blanket off in his 
sleep ; his crumpled pyjama-jacket had slipped upward, 
revealing a strip of brownish skin covered with black fluff 
just above the navel. Issa averted his eyes from his father’s 
nakedness. He held a small cup of bitter coffee in his hand 
which would soon get cold and thus lead to violent un- 
pleasantness. His eyes shifted nervously round the white- 
washed room, bare except for the bed, the straw mat, some 
low wicker stools and a fly-paper hanging from the ceiling. 
The wall opposite the bed was adorned with a coloured paper 
fan and portrait prints of General Allenby and of a smirking 
person in striped trousers with a carnation in his buttonhole, 
who looked like a ladies’ hairdresser from Leeds and at 
closer scrutiny proved to be Mr. Neville Chamberlain. The 
portraits were each decorated with a bunch of dry cornflower 
stalks as a token of the Mukhtar’s loyalty, and a chain of 
blue glass beads to protect Mr. Chamberlain against the 
Evil Eye. 

The coffee was getting cold. Issa cleared his throat. 
“ Father,” he called. “ Welcome, Father.” 

The Mukhtar woke at once, and with one sudden heave 
got himself into an erect sitting position. 

“ Welcome twice,” he said, reaching for the coffee. He 
knew that they would not dare to wake him without urgent 
reason and waited to be told, his heavy bloodshot eyes on 
his son’s insipid face, gulping the bitter coffee with noisy sips. 

“ Father, they have occupied the Hill of Dogs,” said 
Issa. Hill of Dogs was the name by which the villagers of 
Kfar Tabiyeh called the Place, derived from some old 
legendary event which they had forgotten. 

The Mukhtar heaved himself out of bed, ignored the 
slippers which his son held out for him and, barefooted, 
walked out to the balcony. The sun had risen about an 



THE FIRST DAY 


21 


hour ago, and already the air was hot. He leaned heavily 
with his palms on the parapet of red bricks which, with gaps 
left between each adjoining pair, made a kind of horizontal 
lattice. Beyond the Mukhtar’s house there were only a few 
clay huts which formed the outposts of the village, then the 
sparsely terraced slope down to the valley. The valley was 
arid and stony with a few patches of black, ploughed-up 
earth ; on its further side rose the equally arid Hill of Dogs. 
The top of the hill seemed to swarm with tiny black crawling 
figures. In the midst of that busy antheap something like a 
vertical match-stick could be made out : the watch-tower. 

With slow, deliberate chewing movements the Mukhtar 
gathered the saliva in his mouth, masticated it and spat over 
the parapet. He cursed softly and savagely under his breath, 
then turned to Issa : 

“ Why are you standing about, you pock-marked mule ? 
Get my war glass.” 

The youth jumped and returned a moment later with a 
heavy and impressive telescope of brass. It was a relic of 
the Turkish Army, in which the Mukhtar had fought as an 
officer against General Allenby’s forces in the first world 
war. He adjusted the glass and the Hill of Dogs jumped 
from a distance of two miles to one of two hundred yards. 
The panelled frame of the watch-tower, now visible in detail, 
dominated the scene ; on its top one could see the cyclopean 
reflector-eye which at night would blink its messages to the 
intruders’ confederates, defiling the peaceful darkness of the 
hills. Around the tower there were the messy beginnings 
of a camp with tangled barbed wire, trenches and dug-outs, 
several tents and the first wall of a pre-fabricated wooden 
hut in the process of erection. And all around bustling 
figures, digging, hammering and running about in undigni- 
fied, alien hurry in their loathsome clothes, bareheaded in 
open shirts ; and their loathsome shameless women with 
naked bulging calves and thighs, and nipples bursting 
through tight shirts — whores, harlots, bitches and daughters 
of bitches. . . . 

The Mukhtar let the glass sink. His face had become a 



22 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


greyish yellow, as in an attack of malaria, and his eyes were 
bloodshot. His stomach almost turned over at the thought 
that henceforth every morning when he got up the first thing 
to meet his eyes would be this abomination, this defilement, 
this brazen challenge of the intruders. Dogs on the Hill of 
Dogs, dropping their filth, wallowing in it, building their 
citadel of filth. ... It was finished. The whole landscape 
was spoilt. Never again would he, the Mukhtar of Kfar 
Tabiyeh, be allowed to enjoy the use of his own balcony. 
His eyes would no longer rest in peace on God’s creation, 
watch the fellaheen in the valley walking behind their 
wooden ploughs in dignified leisure, watch the sheep flock- 
ing over the slopes — they would be drawn to that one spot 
in which the whole landscape had become focused, that 
poisoned fountain of evil, the well of blasphemy and 
temptation. . . . 

From inside the house he heard the slow clop-clop of 
the old man’s stick on the stone floor. Issa, who had also 
heard it, quickly brought his father’s clothes. The Mukhtar 
got into his long wide skirts, pulled the striped vest over his 
pyjamas, wrapped the kefiyeh round his head, lifted the coiled 
agal with both hands into the air like a crown and adjusted 
it on top of the kefiyeh. He had just finished dressing when 
the old man, stick in front, emerged on the balcony. Dis- 
regarding his son’s and grandson’s greetings, he advanced 
with small firm steps to the parapet, rested his stick on its 
top and lifted his blind face towards the hills. “ Where ? ” 
he asked with a curt, commanding bellow. His sparse white 
goat’s-beard stuck out in front, and his bony nose with the 
hawk’s bend seemed to sniff the air for the smell of the 
intruders. 

“ Over there, on the Dogs’ Hill,” the Mukhtar said sub- 
missively, guiding the stick in the old man’s hand towards 
the spot. 

The old man gave no answer ; he stood erect and motion- 
less at the parapet, his face lifted to the hills. Issa, avoiding 
the Mukhtar’s eye, had disappeared into the house. The 
Mukhtar stood behind his father like a waiter in attendance, 



THE FIRST DAY 


23 

his big, heavy body slumped into guilty shapelessness. At 
last he could bear the old man’s silence no longer. 

“ It is not my fault,” he said in a throaty, plaintively 
bumptious voice. “ The whole village wanted to sell. They 
would have sold even against my will, the dogs, and we would 
have got nothing.” 

The old man made no answer and no move. 

“ I only got eight hundred,” said the Mukhtar, “ and 
they would have sold anyway. I could do nothing. They 
cheated us, the swine. In Khubeira they paid six pounds 
for the dunum and another five hundred to the Mukhtar.” 

The old man again said nothing and after a while turned 
round and hobbled back into the house, his stick stepping 
in front. 

The Mukhtar listened to the receding clop-clop on the 
tiles. By God, he thought, what does he know ? He sees 
nothing and understands nothing of the world. By God. . . . 

He retreated into his bedroom without turning again 
towards the hill ; but in the centre of his back, between the 
shoulder-blades, he felt its contemptuous stare like the stare 
of the Evil Eye. 

On his morning walk through the village the Mukhtar 
felt lonely and weighed down by the decisions he had to 
take within the next few hours ; in fact he knew that he 
should have decided at once when Issa woke him with the 
news. He would have cancelled the walk but for the infer- 
ences which the villagers and the other Mukhtar would 
have drawn from such an omission. So he marched as usual 
along the one cobbled street which wound its way serpent- 
like through the village, stately in his bulk, unapproachable 
with his dark, morose face; dignified and awe-inspiring. 
Despite the holes and bumps in the street he never had to 
look down at his feet, which knew every gap between the 
cobbles and each turn of the gutter-canal that ran along 
the middle of the street as the serpent’s inverted spine — 
its lay-out had not changed since the time of the Romans. 
The fellaheen who were not out in the fields greeted him 



24 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

with their usual deference in front of the clay huts, while 
the women on the doorsteps withdrew with their usual 
modesty into the semi-darkness inside. At the sight of their 
shapeless, slatternly black widow-gear, of their faces which 
were withered and dumb at twenty, and of the eternal infant 
with the fly-ridden slimy face which they carried on their 
sagging breast or in a sling on their back, the Mukhtar 
thought with renewed fury of the shameless bitches on the 
Hill of Dogs and their naked arms and thighs. Yes, every- 
thing was as usual, and when he stopped to honour some 
elder of prominent family or other man of consequence, by 
inquiring after their health and the health of their sons and 
the state of their fields and of their cattle, the Mukhtar got 
the usual answer that thanks to God all was well and nothing 
to complain about. Not one referred, by word or implica- 
tion, not even by a questioning glance, to the impending 
events ; and yet their shadow lay on every face, and they all 
knew of the decision which the Mukhtar had to take — and 
washed their hands of it, the cowardly swine, so that after- 
wards they could say that they had heard nothing, known 
nothing, of the events of the coming night — provided, that 
is, that such events were to take place at all. . . . 

So now his thoughts had already embarked on the prob- 
lem which he had tried to shelve or at least to postpone, yet 
from which there was no escape. It was a fateful dilemma 
which he ought to be able to discuss with other wise and 
experienced men, but which by its very nature precluded 
discussion. Not even with his own family could he share 
the burden. His father, whom may God grant still many 
years, had lost his understanding for the ways of this world, 
and his eldest son was a pock-marked hyena with nothing 
in his head but dreams of money to visit the whore-houses 
in Syria — waiting with glee for his own father to fall into 
the trap this way or the other : to get either hanged by the 
Government or shot by the Arab Patriots in the hills. 

For these, indeed, were the alternatives in store for the 
Mukhtar if he did not act with extreme wisdom and caution. 
The Patriots were everywhere around in the hills, led by the 



THE FIRST DAY 


25 

famous Syrian revolutionary Fawzi el Din Kawki, whom 
may God grant still many years of glory, though as far away 
as possible from the peaceful village of Kfar Tabiyeh. The 
trouble, however, was that Fawzi’s secret headquarters hap- 
pened to be at the moment not more than three hours’ 
horse-ride away at a certain hidden spot in the hills, and that 
his men came regularly every other night to Kfar Tabiyeh 
to fetch the village’s tribute to the Cause in sheep, flour and 
durrha. Not for nothing had Fawzi served in the Turkish 
Army and under King Ibn Saud ; he knew how to organise 
his supplies and live on the fat of the land. Of these nightly 
goings-on the Mukhtar was officially as ignorant as the rest 
of the village ; and during the occasional visits of Assistant 
District Commissioner Newton, after the greetings and 
courtesies had been exchanged, the health and prosperity 
of both families mutually ascertained, after coffee had been 
served, the weather and the prospective crops discussed, his 
innocence became established clearer than daylight for every- 
body concerned. The recent increase in nocturnal thefts 
was of course admitted and deplored with deep sighs and 
mournful reflection on these godless and lawless times ; 
but what could a poor village Mukhtar do against these 
sneaking, invisible thieves ? One could not expect each 
sheep or hen to be fastened by a lock and chain round its 
legs — and this joke, though often repeated, always gave 
rise to great and protracted hilarity, the slapping of one’s 
knees and the wiping of tears from one’s eyes — except for 
Newton Effendi who would continue to sip his coffee in 
absent-minded silence. So far, so good — but the Mukhtar 
had a premonition that it couldn’t be carried much further, 
and that the joke was losing its flavour. At his last visit 
Newton Effendi had been more absent-minded than ever 
and, talking of sheep and cattle, had mentioned in his 
mumbling way the impending arrival of a pack of blood- 
hounds capable of tracing any trail of thieves to the very 
end of this hilly world. They could of course prove nothing 
definite against the Mukhtar ; but what if they searched the 
village and found some of Fawzi’s men, who had the regret- 

c 



26 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


table habit of staying overnight in one hut or another — a 
service which hospitality couldn’t refuse ; or if some dirty 
rat from the other Mukhtar’s family gave evidence and swore 
to some invented pack of lies ? There was danger every- 
where, and who knew Newton Effendi’s game ? It was 
evident that he wanted to avoid trouble ; but on the other 
hand it was undeniable that the Patriots had gone too far 
by killing not only Hebrews but Englishmen as well, and 
turning against the Government itself. The whole situation 
had changed and a man knew no longer where he was, not 
even with Assistant District Commissioner Newton. And 
then there were the Military ; they had lately started to blow 
up houses to punish peaceful villages like Kfar Tabiyeh 
against whom nothing could be proved ; and they always 
selected the best houses in the village to be blown up, the 
Mukhtar’s first. . . . There was of course the Arab Bank 
which was quite generous in granting credit for the rebuilding 
of the victims’ houses, and some people in Lydda and Ramleh 
had fared quite well by getting a handsome stone house 
built to replace a clay hut or some decrepit ruin ; it was 
even said that some clever ones had found the means of 
having their mud huts blown to glory though the English 
forgot to bother about them. Still, one’s house was one’s 
house, and if it happened to be a good house one did not 
like to take risks with it ; and even less with one’s neck, which 
no generosity of the Arab Bank could replace. . . . 

Pursuing his thoughts, the Mukhtar had completed his 
circular walk and arrived home ; he put on his slippers, 
ordered his water pipe and sat down under Mr. Chamber- 
lain’s portrait to continue his lonely meditation. The quiet 
bubbling of the pipe soothed his mind, while his hands were 
engaged in pushing the yellow amber beads of his rosary. 

His thoughts turned to the other horn of the dilemma. 
It had been the expressed wish of Fawzi el Din that a 
messenger should be sent to him at once if the Hebrews tried 
to take possession of the Dogs’ Hill. It was easy to guess 
the reasons for the Patriot leader’s keen interest in the matter. 
He wanted to set an example. An example which would 



THE FIRST DAY 


*7 

prove to the world once and for all that the Arab nation had 
decided to put a stop to the building of new settlements by 
the Hebrews. If Fawzi succeeded, the dogs would never 
dare to try it again, and the piecemeal slipping away of the 
land into their hands would be ended. 

Yes, Fawzi’s intention was obvious, and there was every 
chance of his succeeding in wiping the dogs of the Dogs’ 
Hill from the face of the earth. The Mukhtar took a deep 
breath, and the bubbles in the pipe increased as if the water 
had started to boil. Oh, to wake up in the morning and to 
look at the hill and to see the watch-tower gone and those 
creeping insects vanished like jinnis in the light ; and to 
breathe the pure air and behold the peaceful country with 
its silent hills. ... By God, it shall be. 

The Mukhtar got up and called for Issa. He had made 
up his mind. He had given a promise to Fawzi el Din and 
he was going to keep it, whatever the consequences might be. 
The English might blow up the village, they might even 
blow up his house — they would soon find out that no 
threats and no brutality could prevail against a nation united 
in its will, decided to defend its soil against the foreign 
intruder. Besides, they couldn’t prove anything. Kfar 
Tabiyeh was a peaceful village whose peasants slept the 
sleep of the just and knew nothing of the happenings of the 
night. 

Issa received the Mukhtar’s instructions with frightened, 
shifting eyes but in respectful silence. He bowed, touched 
his forehead, kissed his father’s hand and went to saddle 
his horse. After all, the Mukhtar thought, he is a good boy. 
And in a warm surge of generosity he decided to buy Issa 
a good wife, regardless of cost ; a strapping girl as firm- 
fleshed and round as any of the bitches on the hill in their 
tight-bottomed pants. 

Now that he had made up his mind, he felt relaxed and 
at peace with himself. For beneath the surface of his 
boisterousness he knew himself to be a weak, corrupt and 
greedy man ; but he also knew that his love for the hills 
and his country was genuine, and that he would defend it 



28 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

against the intruders with cunning, courage and ruse, with 
smiles and treachery, and was quite prepared, at least as long 
as his present mood lasted, to get himself hanged and not 
even to twitch when they slipped the coiled rope over his 
head. 


5 

The convoy had arrived at its destination just before sunrise. 

Only the lighter trucks were able to drive up nearly to 
the top of the hill. Their engines roared and their radiators 
spouted steam as they crept at two miles an hour up the 
pathless incline covered with rubble and patches of dry, 
crumbling earth. The heavier trucks had to stop half-way 
up where the dirt track ended. 

Bauman and his boys awaited the convoy at the top. 
They had arrived two hours earlier and seemed already much 
at home among those inhospitable starlit rocks. Bauman 
had dispersed the boys along the undulating saddle of the 
hill and on the edge of rocks protruding over the slope ; 
there they stood or squatted in dark clusters, the glowing 
sparks of their cigarettes suspended in the air, their rifles 
sharply silhouetted against the stars. 

On the very top of the hill, in the most advantageous 
position, a rectangle of a hundred by sixty yards was neatly 
pegged out, marking the site for the camp. A tractor with 
a plough rattled slowly and painfully around this rectangle 
drawing the first symbolical furrow, which, according to 
Arab custom, signified that the new settlers had effectively 
taken possession of the land. 

About half-past five a slight inflammation over the hills 
to the east showed that the sky was preparing for the rise 
of day ; a grey pallor expanded overhead in which the stars 
dissolved one by one, and soon afterwards the sun rose with 
brisk abruptness, as if in a hurry. Within a quarter of an 
hour the cloudless sky had changed from light grey into a 
transparent greenish blue, and all around the hills emerged 



THE FIRST DAY 


29 

in their normal day-shape, arid and desolate and yet soft 
and gently curved. They were reddish brown at close range, 
chalk-grey in the distance, and became of an unreal tender 
violet pastel shade as they receded towards the horizon. 
The new settlers found themselves in the centre of a land- 
scape of gentle desolation, a barrenness mellowed by age 
The rocks had settled down for eternity ; the sparse scrubs 
and olive trees exhaled a silent and contented resignation. 
A few vultures sailed round the hill-top ; the curves they 
described seemed to paraphrase the smooth curvature of the 
hills. 

On the slope across the valley to the east stood the 
village of Kfar Tabiyeh, silent and apparently deserted. Its 
houses were the colour of the hill, built from the clay and 
stone of the hill ; they hugged the slope out of which they 
were carved and into which they seemed to dissolve by 
natural mimicry. Their walls were blind with only the 
smallest square window-hole or no windows at all. The 
terraces below the village were protected by loose stone walls, 
demolished in parts by last year’s rain. Some of the houses 
carried spherical domes of baked clay ; others had flat mud 
roofs with grass and weeds growing out of them. The whole 
of the village looked like an ancient ruin spread over the 
slope and gently crumbling away into the dust out of which 
it had arisen in some timeless past ; it basked peacefully 
under the early but already hardening rays of the Galilean 
sun. 

The people who had arrived in the convoy clustered 
round a truck from the top of which Reuben, the leader of 
the new settlers, read out the roll and the task allotted to 
each man and woman. He was a tall, bony fellow with 
sparse gestures and a way of commanding silence without 
raising his voice. After some initial muddle the groups 
sorted themselves out, and by 6 a.m. everybody was at his 
job. The largest group, of about fifty people, was engaged 
in clearing a path for the heavy trucks from the end of the 
dirt track to the camp on the hill-top, a distance of about 



30 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

two hundred yards. The stones they picked up were thrown 
into baskets ; the baskets travelled from hand to hand along 
a chain to the top, where a second group, skilled men from 
the Haganah , used them for the building of parapets. These 
parapets protected five dug-outs, two of them facing north, 
and one each towards the east, south and west. A third 
group was digging zigzag trenches to connect the dug-outs ; 
owing to the shallowness of the earth over the rocky ground 
these connecting trenches could only provide protection for 
men creeping on all fours. Another group rammed iron 
posts into the earth for the barbed-wire fence which was to 
surround the camp in front of the trenches. 

Meanwhile the erection of the watch-tower and of the 
living quarters within the fortified area had started. The 
watch-tower, a panelled wooden frame thirty-five feet high 
and weighing over three tons, had travelled on a specially 
constructed caterpillar carrier ; its erection was a delicate 
job tackled by specialists who had done it before in other 
settlements. Their method was primitive and ingenious. 
They made a heap of stones and drove the front part of the 
carrier over it, until the base of the tower which was jutting 
out over the rear of the carrier, touched ground. Then they 
fixed a steel cable with one end to the top of the tower ; 
the other end was attached to a drum worked by the engine 
of a tractor. They also fixed two ropes to the head of the 
tower and held them tight at right angles to the cable, a 
dozen hands pulling on each side to prevent the tower 
toppling over sideways. The tower now lay on the carrier 
like a giant figure, the ropes forming its outstretched arms ; 
then the engine of the tractor started to work, the drum 
turned and the cable began to pull the giant by its forehead, 
forcing it to rise slowly into the air. There was something 
solemn and stirring about the tower’s slow, majestic erection, 
and while it lasted all work stopped. Silent and breathless 
the crowd watched the tower rise to an angle of thirty degrees, 
then forty-five, then sixty. When it had almost reached the 
vertical position the engine was stopped, and in the sudden 
silence the tower continued to swing forward, very slowly, 



THE FIRST DAY 


31 

under its own gravity, like a man balancing on his heels ; 
while the men at the end of the two ropes hung anxiously 
on to them to ensure the towels smooth alighting. At last, 
with a slight bump, the whole base touched ground ; the 
tower quivered once and stood on the earth, firm and erect. 
A spontaneous yell burst forth from the crowd, hoarse and 
inarticulate. All the tension of the previous night seemed to 
explode in that one gasping shout, a long-drawn a-a-ah, a 
roar of savage release. For a moment it looked as if they 
were all going to start dancing round the tower some pagan 
roundelay of priapic worship ; then, with an awkward 
hesitation, they picked up their tools and went back to their 
work. 

At 6.30 a.m., the moment when the Mukhtar of Kfar 
Tabiyeh was woken from his sleep, two tents had been roped 
to the ground, the unloading of the trucks was in full swing, 
the first pre-fabricated section of the first living-hut was 
being carried to its site, and Ezra’s Tower had an air about 
it of having stood there from time immemorial. On the 
small platform on top of the tower stood Bauman in his black 
leather jacket, armed with a telescope ; at his side stood a 
boy with a red signalling flag. Soon after sunrise Bauman 
had sent out mounted patrols to the surrounding hills, and 
the first of these had just emerged on the hill across the wadi 
to the west. The three riders moved slowly in single file 
along the crest ; they wore Arab headgear and fitted quite 
convincingly into the landscape. Presently the first rider 
lifted his red flag with a wide, sweeping gesture over his head. 

“ Signal,” Bauman said to the boy, without taking the 
glass from his eye. 

The boy swept the flag round in a semicircle, held it for 
a second stiffly over his head, and dropped it abruptly. His 
arm moved in swift, precise movements like a mechanical 
doll’s, and the flag gave a faint rustling sound each time it 
swished through the air. 

Now it was the turn of the rider on the hill. His flag 
was to the naked eye a tiny red dot jumping about in the 



32 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

air in vertical, horizontal and circular lines with beautiful 
precision. 

“ All quiet/ 7 Bauman read through his glass. “ Too 
quiet for my liking/’ he said to the boy. “ Tell them to 
hang on.” 

By 9 a.m. the rough path from the dirt track to the site 
had been sufficiently cleared for the heavy trucks to move 
up. Their unloading started at once. The empty trucks 
were formed into a convoy and sent back to Gan Tamar to 
fetch the rest of the materials. At that time three walls of the 
first living-hut were already standing, the hole for the latrine 
was dug, the water-tank installed on its ramshackle temporary 
base, and the pipes for the shower-bath were unloaded. 
Some of the Helpers were beginning to think of a break, but 
there was to be none until twelve o’clock. 

At 10.45 the watch-post reported the approach of Arabs 
from the direction of Kfar Tabiyeh. Bauman had already 
spotted them from the tower. They were a strange pro- 
cession. In front walked two barefooted children in their 
loose, striped kaftans which looked like nightgowns. Behind 
them three or four women in black, also barefooted. Behind 
these the men, about ten of them, in striped skirts and Euro- 
pean jackets, their naked feet in string-laced shoes. They 
were unarmed except for some shepherds’ sticks. They 
came unhurriedly up the slope ; the children’s faces looked 
scared, the women’s vacant, the men’s watchful and blank. 

As they approached the barbed wire, the Hebrews working 
on the site lifted their heads, gave them a short look and went 
on working, pretending to ignore their presence. Their 
faces had become taut and shut ; the quiet elation of the 
work had gone. Bauman and Reuben met the Arabs at the 
barbed wire. The Arabs came slowly up to them, the women 
and children falling back, the men approaching the fence 
with a negligent stroll. They saw the symbolic furrow, and 
their eyes followed the furrow’s course around the site. 

“ Marhaba,” said one of them, “ welcome.” 

“ Welcome twice,” Reuben said. 



THE FIRST DAY 


33 

The Arabs started moving along the fence towards the 
end which was not yet fenced in. But where the barbed 
wire ended the boys of the Haganah stood leaning on their 
rifles, wooden-faced, barring their way. 

“ We want to come in,” one of the Arabs said. He looked 
more like a Turk and smiled blandly. 

“ Two of you are welcome to come in,” said Reuben. 
His Arabic, as his Hebrew, was fluent and businesslike. 

“ God,” cried another Arab, an excitable little man with 
one eye, “ can't we even walk on the land of our fathers 
and of our own ? ” 

“ The land is ours,” said Reuben, “ and there are people 
working who should not be disturbed. But if you come in 
a few days’ time you are welcome to share our meal.” 

“ We came to talk,” said the Turk, smiling over the 
stumps of some decaying teeth. 

“ Then come in and be welcome — the two of you.” 

“ Don’t go,” said the excitable one. “ Who knows what 
will happen ? God, and on our own land. ...” 

“ Come, ya Abu Tafidi. We shall go in and talk to them,” 
said the Turk. 

“ Don’t go, ya Abu Tafidi,” cried the excitable one. 
“ These men are bad, otherwise they would let us all in.” 

The Arabs parleyed loudly among themselves, while the 
Hebrews watched them with expressionless faces. Finally 
the Turk and Abu T afidi walked into the camp , while the others 
squatted down outside the barbed wire. Abu Tafidi was a 
member of the Mukhtar’s clan ; in fact he was his cousin, 
great-uncle and son-in-law all at the same time ; and yet, 
owing to the caprices of heredity, he belonged to a different 
type. He was a tall and bony old man with a distinguished 
stoop about his shoulder and a quiet, pensive way of speech. 
The Turk was fattish, smooth-mannered and jaunty. They 
exchanged compliments with Bauman and Reuben, sat down 
at the foot of the tower and started earnestly to discuss the 
weather and the crops. Then in due course the Turk came 
to the point. Smiling, emphatic and with every sign of 
sincerity, he explained that the settlers — nice, strong young 



34 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

people to whom he wished every good in the world — were 
victims of a cruel mistake in starting to build on this hill, 
for the land was not theirs and shortly of course they would 
have to evacuate it, according to the law. So why not go in 
peace at once, to avoid unpleasantness and remain friends ? 
— He spoke with great simplicity, in a rapid and friendly 
way, while his hands milled round in smooth swift gestures 
as in a deaf-mute pantomime. 

Reuben interrupted him. “ What is this nonsense about 
the land not being ours ? ” he asked evenly. 

The Turk laughed as if at an excellent joke. But surely, 
he explained, they all knew the law — the law of 1935 about 
the protection of tenants in cases of transfer of land ? Of 
course the settlers knew it, they only played the innocents, 
ha-ha — and he winked his eye and slapped his knees and 
shook his finger at Reuben and Bauman, while the old man 
looked on, silent and impassive. Of course, the Turk went 
on, the settlers had offered some compensation to the dis- 
possessed tenants, but was it enough ? Was it fair ? Of 
course it was not. The law guaranteed protection to dis- 
possessed tenants, and the law was sacred. And if some 
of the tenants, poor, ignorant, uneducated fools, had in 
momentary confusion agreed to take some compensation 
money and signed some paper which they did not under- 
stand — what did that mean, and who was to prove that 
such an agreement was valid ? “ Oh, come, come, ,, the 

Turk said with paternal affability, “ you are educated young 
people, you have been to schools and universities, surely 
you know all this ? Surely you want to act according to the 
law, and avoid trouble and bloodshed ? ” 

Bauman and Reuben both rose at the same time, without 
having exchanged a glance. “ We must get on with our 
work,” said Bauman. “ This land has been lawfully acquired, 
and there is nothing more to be said about it.” 

The Turk’s face had grown a shade darker ; it looked 
as if he had never smiled. 

“ You young fools and children of death,” he said quietly. 
“ You don’t know what may happen to you.” 



THE FIRST DAY 


35 


“ We are prepared/’ Bauman said curtly. 

There was a moment’s silence. One of Bauman’s boys 
came up to them, carrying a copper tray with four small 
cups of unsweetened coffee. The Turk, after a short hesita- 
tion, took his cup ; the old man refused. They sipped 
their coffee standing. Then the old man spoke for the first 
time. 

“ I know not much about the law,” he said ; his voice 
was gentle, almost soft. “ A man who is rich and cunning 
may offer money to another one who is poor and ignorant, 
and this other man may sell him his cattle and his hut. 
There is no justice in this. This hill belonged to our fathers 
and our fathers’ fathers.” 

“ And before that, it belonged to our fathers’ fathers,” 
said Bauman. 

“ So the books say. But your ancestors lost it. A 
country which one has lost one cannot buy back with money.” 

“ This hill has borne no crop since our ancestors left it,” 
said Reuben. “ You have neglected the land. You let the 
terraces fall to ruin, and the rain carried the earth away. 
We shall clean the hill of the stones and bring tractors and 
fertilisers.” 

“ What the valley bears is enough for us,” said the old 
man. “ Where God put stones, man should not carry them 
away. We shall live as our fathers lived and we do not want 
your money and your tractors and your fertilisers, and we 
do not want your women whose sight offends the eye.” 

He had spoken angrily, but without raising his voice, as 
one accustomed to see young men take his words reverently 
and in blind obedience. 

“ Our ideas differ,” Bauman said with polite finality. 
“ And now I believe we have said all that is to be said.” 

The old man turned silently on his heels and walked out 
of the camp. The Turk hesitated, then said with a certain 
reluctance : 

“ The fellaheen of Kfar Tabiyeh are peaceful men. 
There are Arabs in the hills around who are not so peaceful. 
You have been warned.” He lowered his voice and added 



36 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

in a confidential tone : “ . . . This warning our Mukhtar 
charged me to transmit to you, as a sign of his goodwill, 
although the Patriots would pay him ill if they knew about it.” 

Bauman chuckled softly. “ Your Mukhtar is a wise 
man,” he said. “ Nobody likes to see his house blown up 
by soldiers. Your Mukhtar is like a fox who lives in a hole 
with two escapes, one to sunrise and one to sunset.” 

The Turk shrugged. “ Peace with you,” he said, turning 
to catch up with the old man. 

The Arabs outside the barbed wire rose to their feet. 
At first they had sat there in tense silence and watched the 
proceedings under the tower. As the minutes had passed 
and they saw the Turk laugh and slap his knees in animated 
talk, they had relaxed. When they were offered coffee on 
trays, which they refused twice and accepted the third time 
as is befitting, they had relaxed even more. The children 
had munched oranges and the women, sitting huddled 
together at a little distance from the men, had started giggling 
and pointing at the girls with naked legs. Then the men 
had started chatting with some of the Haganah boys who 
knew Arabic ; the boys, leaning on their rifles, had answered 
condescendingly and treated them to cigarettes. When the 
parley at the tower broke up, the excitable one-eyed villager 
had just started inquiring whether the new settlers would 
bring a doctor and open a dispensary as the other settlements 
had done, and whether the doctor would be able to cure his 
blind eye. Now, as their speakers returned and they saw 
their dark faces, they surrounded them with the guilty look 
of children who had been naughty in their parents’ absence. 
The Turk and the old man walked silently through their 
group. The others formed into pairs behind them, and the 
procession slowly descended the slope without turning their 
heads. 

The Turk and the old man did not speak until they had 
almost reached the valley. Then the Turk said : 

“ The devil may take them away, but he could leave their 
tractors. They are dogs and sons of bitches but they know 
how to work. They will grow tomatoes and melons and 



THE FIRST DAY 


37 

God knows what out of that stony hill. . . He sighed 
“ We are too lazy, ya Abu ; by God . . .” 

The old man turned on him with a hard look. 

“ You speak like a fool,” he said. “ Is the hill here for 
me, or am I here for the hill ? ” 

After the villagers left, Joseph, who had watched the 
parley with curiosity from the top of a truck which he 
was helping to unload, came up to Bauman. “ Listen/' he 
said, “ why did you not let them all come in ? It was very 
rude." 

Bauman looked at him with a faint smile. 

“ We are too weak to afford to be polite," he said. “ By 
keeping them out we established ourselves in their eyes as 
masters of the place. By now they have all unconsciously 
accepted the fact.” 

Joseph grinned. “ Where did you learn all this psycho- 
logy, Bauman ? ” he said. 

“ Intuition,” said Bauman. 

“ I thought one only had intuitions about people one 
liked.” 

“ Who told you that I don't like them ? ” said Bauman. 

“ I wish my Arabic was as good as yours,” said Joseph. 
“ What was the old sheikh explaining so solemnly ? ” 

“ He explained that every nation has the right to live 
according to its own fashion, right or wrong, without outside 
interference. He explained that money corrupts, fertilisers 
stink and tractors make a noise, all of which he dislikes.” 

“ And what did you answer ? ” 

“ Nothing.” 

“ But you saw his point ? ” 

Bauman looked at him steadily : 

“We cannot afford to see the other man's point 



3 « 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


6 

During the half-hour’s break at noon, two private cars came 
jolting up the wadi, escorted by a Bren carrier and followed 
by a cloud of dust. The first car carried the Assistant District 
Commissioner and Mrs. Newton, accompanied by a Major 
of the Police Force. Mr. Newton was a thin, tired-looking 
middle-aged man with a sparse and untidy moustache. He 
had been transferred to this country after eight years of 
service as an Assistant Commissioner in Roonah, North- 
West India. In the club in Roonah he had always been 
referred to by the men as a Decent old chap and by the 
women as Such a dear, followed by an imperceptible 
pause and a change of conversation. During his term 
of office in Roonah he had been involved in no scandal 
and acquired no distinction ; he had vanished out of the 
colony as unobtrusively as he had entered it eight years 
before, leaving no memory-trace except for an occasional 
mild joke about his only known hobby, chess, and a com- 
passionate reference to the only major blunder he had ever 
committed, the marrying of his wife. 

Mrs. Newton was the daughter of a Sergeant-Major in 
the Indian Army. An intimate analysis of the motives 
which had attracted timid Mr. Newton to that tall, bony and 
virginal female would have produced embarrassing results 
by unearthing Mr. Newton’s steady, stealthy and fervent 
loathing for Roonah, the Club, the Indian Civil Service and 
Army; and his oblique sense of humour which the first 
time led him to visualise the Sergeant-Major’s chaste and 
angular daughter in a series of those preposterous attitudes 
which the act of procreation entails. It started as a grotesque 
private joke and grew until it became an obsession of Mr. 
Newton’s starved and chess-trained mind, accustomed to 
visualise positions after both partners’ various moves. 
What he did not foresee — for he was a kindly man with no 
more repressed nastiness than the average — was the stale- 



THE FIRST DAY 


39 

mate which followed the first few opening moves almost 
immediately after their marriage. The real situation had 
none of the humour and mystery which made the imagined 
one so fascinating ; but it was too late by then. A stale- 
mate cannot be undone. 

The third passenger in the car, copper-faced Police Major 
Edwards, was in a bad temper because Mr. Newton, pre- 
tending to be polite, had taken the seat next to the driver 
which the Major liked ; while Mrs. Newton vaguely thought, 
as always when in the company of a man in uniform, how 
much happier she would be had she married into the Forces. 

In the second car sat Mr. Glickstein and Mr. Winter, 
both members of the Zionist Executive in Jerusalem, and 
wedged in between them an American newspaper man 
named Dick Matthews who was on a ten days’ tour through 
the country. On the front seat next to the driver sat the 
Zionist Executive’s official photographer, Dr. phil. Emil 
Lustig. The photographer and the driver were discussing 
in German Nietzsche’s influence on Fascist ideology. The 
journalist was listening with one ear to their conversation, 
looking bored. Glickstein noticed it. 

“ Do you understand German ? ” he asked. 

“ A little,” said Matthews, 

“ We are a funny country, what ? ” said Glickstein. He 
had put on his propaganda smile, baring his gold teeth. 
“ Our driver was a graphological expert / at the Criminal 
Court of Karlsruhe before he became a pioneer.” 

“ They are all great guys,” said Matthews, bored. 

“ The photographer,” Glickstein continued, “ was a 
lecturer of philosophy at Heidelberg.” 

“ Yeah,” said Matthews, who had stood two hours of 
propaganda in Glickstein ’s bumpy English. “ It reminds 
me of the taxi-drivers in Paris after the last war who were 
all Russian Grand Dukes.” 

Glickstein’s smile became pinched. “ Allow me,” he 
said. “ Those people were thrown out of Russia. But most 
of our pioneers came to our country of their own free will, 
long before Hitlerism began.” 



40 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ You win — as usual,” said Matthews. His sense of 
fairness compelled him to admit that Glickstein was right 
and that all these admirable guys were doing an admirable 
job about this National Home of theirs. But he wished to 
God Glickstein would talk less about it, and with less of that 
intensity which sprayed the moisture from his lips into 
one’s face, and that all these clever and admirable guys 
would relax sometimes and offer a guy a drink instead of 
statistics and heroics, and would get drunk sometimes 
themselves. He had now spent almost five days touring the 
country and had collected a lot of stuff for his story, but 
somehow the story didn’t come off — or came off the 
wrong way, with a twist in it which he hadn’t intended to 
put in, and which would have been unfair to these guys 
whom, the more he was with them, the more he admired 
and disliked. 

Matthews sighed and rather embarrassedly pulled a flat 
bottle from his hip pocket. These people didn’t drink, and 
he did not wish to shock them, but sometimes a guy got 
fed up. He offered the bottle to Glickstein and to Winter 
and then gave it up and fiercely took a deep gulp, almost 
blushing. He saw Glickstein’s indulgent, gold-flashing 
smile, and he wished to God Glickstein were a Fascist and 
that he had an excuse for a good, straight punch at his nose. 

Winter, sitting on the other side of Matthews, had not 
said a word for the last hour. He was filled with a quiet, 
aching bitterness which each remark of Matthews’ increased. 
A goy remains a goy, he thought, well-meaning or not. Here 
he travels through a country where our people are doing 
something more fantastic and difficult than their famous 
conquest of the West, and all he can think of is to compare 
us with Paris taxi-drivers and night-club whores ; and all 
the emotion he is capable of working up comes out of his 
bottle ; — look how he tilts it up and how his lips form a 
disgusting ring of flesh round its neck. Ay, don’t we know 
the Bottle and what it does to the goy — the songs at the top, 
the sentimentality in the middle, and the pogrom at the 
bottom. . . . 



THE FIRST DAY 


41 

Joseph and Dina lay resting side by side in the narrow 
strip of shadow next to the still roofless dining-hut. Behind 
their heads sat Simeon with his back against the wall, knees 
drawn up against his body and trousers pulled up neatly 
over his ankles. He was reading last night’s Davar , the 
Labour evening paper which a lorry had just brought up 
from Gan Tamar. Next to him sat Dasha, a good-natured 
fattish girl with a pretty face already coarsening under the 
influence of climate and work. 

“ There come the big-heads,” said Joseph, as the two 
cars and their escoit came in sight, struggling up the last 
stretch towards the top. 

No one answered. They were all exhausted, fearful of 
the moment, twenty minutes ahead, when they would have 
to start work ag.*£n. Except for the watch-posts the whole 
camp lay prostrate, dazed by the blazing sun, immobile like 
lizards on a hot rock. As the cars pulled up near the tower, 
they lifted their heads and let them fall back again on their 
arms. Only Reuben and Bauman got up to greet the 
guests. 

Mrs. Newton got out first ; she viewed the scene with dis- 
approval, taking it as a personal insult that nobody seemed to 
get up or take any notice of their arrival. The Major climbed 
out next from the car. “ Good morning,” he shouted with 
bluff heartiness, turning to Reuben and Bauman. “ Are 
you the leaders of this happy gang ? ” His voice exploded 
like a shell in the heavy, dazed silence. 

They all shook hands, except Mrs. Newton. The travel- 
lers from the other car joined them. They stood about in 
a group in the shadow of the tower. Dr. phil. Lustig took 
informal snapshots of them, prowling around the group with 
self-conscious unobtrusiveness, a permanent smile on his 
lips and behind his rimless, sharp-lensed glasses, which 
meant to convey that he was Only a Photographer. Then he 
strolled off with his Leica to photograph the hill with its 
stones and the camp in statu nascendi . Each time he clicked 
the shutter, he saw in his mind’s eye the caption to the 
picture just exposed, as it would appear in some future 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


42 

propaganda album : “ Five years ago Ezra’s Tower was 
nothing but a stony desert . . while underneath 
would be the photograph of a modern communal village, 
with white concrete houses, shady eucalyptus alleys, lawns, 
orchards and laughing children : . . . and this is how 

it looks now ”. 

He took a snapshot of one of Bauman’s boys with his 
rifle, in profile, from a low angle, so that the figure became 
toweringly silhouetted against the sky : . . Even as in 

the times of Ezra, when the men who returned from 
the Babylonian Exile with one of their hands wrought 

IN THE WORK AND WITH THE OTHER HELD A WEAPON ...” 

Dr. Lustig was moved. The sun shone hard, sweat from 
his forehead trickled down under his glasses and stung his 
eyes. He rubbed them with the handk'rchief from his 
breast pocket, wiped his glasses, and took a shot of Joseph 
and Dina, squatting on his heels behind their heads, at a 
refined angle which would make their horizontal faces appear 
hard and sculpted like partisans in a Russian film. His 
imagination, trained to see everything in patterns of 
“ before ” and “ after ”, like advertisements for a face 
powder or nerve tonic, had already surrounded them with 
a bunch of children happily eating home-grown oranges, 
while Dina played on some vague string instrument, a harp 
or lute, as Beth Sheba had played for David. — He tiptoed 
on, smiling to himself, lost in his daydream of the resurrected 
Hebrew State, elated and quite forgetful of the fact that he 
was Only a Photographer. 

Reuben was meanwhile showing the guests round the 
site. He made only a few matter-of-fact comments and 
Matthews thought that he liked this guy much better than 
those big-heads from Jerusalem. Mr. Newton listened 
absent-mindedly ; he had a feeling of bewildered admiration 
for all these young people who started on these ventures 
against such heavy odds, driven on by a sentimental fanatic- 
ism which was entirely alien to him ; at the same time he 
resented the bother which would arise if the Arab terrorist 
gangs started some monkey-business which they certainly 



THE FIRST DAY 


43 

would, though this was, thank God, the Major’s business and 
not his. He also disliked all this messiness which went with 
the building of the camp. It was sure to become one more 
of those ugly, uncouth, modern settlements which were an 
offence to the landscape. What a contrast to the melancholy 
beauty of Arab villages, like the one across the valley, peace- 
fully dormant in the hot, trembling air. . . . 

Mrs. Newton, who walked in front at the Major’s side, 
had similar thoughts, though they were less clearly defined 
and lacked aesthetic appreciation of the beauty of Arab 
villages. But at least with those Arabs one knew where one 
stood ; they were natives and knew their place. Their 
notables were polite and dignified, the mob picturesque and 
obsequious. If occasionally they did some rioting or shooting 
that was only natural, for what else could one expect from 
them ? But the Jews were different. They had no notables 
and no dignity and they were not picturesque. Instead of 
being grateful to the British for letting them in, they behaved 
as if the country belonged to them. Look how they lie 
about on their backs and stomachs, ignoring one, instead of 
jumping to attention when a Major and the A.D.C.’s wife 
inspects them. Good heavens, if they dared to behave like 
this in Roonah ! . . . The trouble of course was that they 
were white — white natives, who has ever heard of such a 
thing ? And on top of it they were all university professors 
or whatnots. Thought they were cleverer than oneself, and 
yet couldn’t even offer one a decent cup of tea at their 
parties, or carry on a really nice conversation. Had to show 
off all the time with their bookishness and the languages 
they knew and what clever-clever fellows they were. . , . 

The Police Major, walking by her side, followed his own 
trend of thoughts. The dry heat reminded him, as it always 
did, of the Sudan from where he had been transferred only 
a few months before ; and how much simpler everything 
had been there. Meanwhile he observed, with a curious and 
expert eye, the dug-outs and trenches those Jew-boys had 
made. They had some pluck to come up here just now, and 
if it was true that Fawzi’s band had moved into the vicinity 



44 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

they were in for a hot time. When all was said, the twelve 
rifles they had been allowed did not amount to much — but 
then they had their blasted defence organisation, the 
Haganaky with its illegal arms. . . . Anyway, they had 
been warned, and if they wanted to play the dare-devils and 
insisted on getting their wretched hill — like that famous 
pound of flesh — well, it was their funeral. As to Fawzi 
and his gang, that was the concern of the Military, bless 
their souls. . . . 

“ Look ! ” Mrs. Newton exclaimed, and with sudden 
animation pointed at Simeon, buried in his Hebrew news- 
paper. “ Look — he does read from right to left, isn’t it 
funny ? ” 

It was the first comment she had made since they had 
got out of the car, and it was made in her sharp, loud voice. 
Simeon slowly dropped his newspaper. The Major turned 
his head, and his blue, slightly goggling eyes plunged all of 
a sudden into a pair of burning black ones with an expres- 
sion of such calm, concentrated hatred that the Major 
experienced something like a faint electric shock. He saw 
with bewilderment a lean young man sitting rigidly erect 
with his back to the hut, with a dark, gaunt face dominated 
by those fanatic eyes which quickly made him avert his own. 
“ Christ,” the Major whispered to Mrs. Newton, “ that 
fellow looks daggers. . . 

He had the weird feeling that he had met the fellow before 
under almost exactly the same circumstances and had 
received, equally undeservedly, the same dirty look. “ Non- 
sense,” thought the Major, as he walked on at the abruptly 
silenced Mrs. Newton’s side. “ But by Jove, what a country, 
what a country ! — it’s as if everybody was walking about 
with sunstroke.” 

At 12.30 p.m. Reuben’s whistle sounded the end of the 
break, and out of the narrow strips of shadow behind the 
tents and huts the workers emerged and scrambled to their 
feet, tottering with fatigue. Soon afterwards the official 
visitors took their leave. As he shook hands with Reuben 



THE FIRST DAY 


45 

and Bauman — Mr. and Mrs. Newton were already inside 
the car — the Major expressed in a hearty and slightly em- 
barrassed voice the hope that all would go well. 

“ We share your hopes,” said Reuben with a faintly sar- 
castic smile. 44 The more so, as we have learnt to look after 
ourselves.” 

The Major said nothing and closed the door of the car 
with a bang. They slowly jolted down the new track, 
followed by the Bren carrier. The party which had come 
with the second car decided to stay for the afternoon and 
go back with the convoy of the returning Helpers, before 
sunset. 

Matthews had succeeded in getting rid of Glickstein 
and Co., as he called them to himself — they were ani- 
matedly conversing in Hebrew with old Wabash — and 
strolled alone through the camp. The barbed-wire fence 
was almost completed, and so were the five main dug- 
outs ; but the trenches connecting them were in places still 
very shallow, and the sweat-glistening faces of the people 
working at them — mainly young and sturdy Sabras — 
became more dogged and sullen as the afternoon advanced. 
In contrast to them the carpenters who were fixing the 
plywood panelling of the dining- and living-huts whistled 
cheerfully, and the boys hammering away at the roof- 
girders and laths were in equally high spirits. The two 
huts stood at right angles to each other and, together with 
the watch-tower, formed a square in the middle of the site. 
The outward-facing walls of the huts were reinforced by a 
stockade of timber, block-house fashion, which had arrived 
in pre-fabricated segments ; the gap between the stockade 
and the hut walls was partly filled up with gravel. Only 
partly, for there had been a hitch : the amount needed had 
apparently been calculated too low, and in addition one of 
the lorries carrying the gravel had broken down. They had 
signalled from the watch-tower to Gan Tamar for further 
supplies, but it was doubtful whether they would arrive 
before sunset ; to Matthews’ surprise nobody seemed to 
worry about it. 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


46 

In the centre of the square stood three tents, huddled 
together between the protecting walls of the tower and the 
two huts. Outside the square, near the barbed wire, was 
the latrine, screened by a fence of pales and divided into two 
by a wooden partition ; a few yards further they were fixing 
the pipes of the shower-bath, also surrounded by a fence but 
as yet with no partition inside. Matthews made a mental 
note of this ; he also wondered why these people bothered 
about a shower-bath before they had finished digging 
trenches. True, there were as many people digging as space 
permitted without getting into each other’s way ; but 
still . . . 

The chap with the black leather jacket smiled at him 
from the platform of the watch-tower and Matthews climbed 
up, awkwardly lifting his heavy body up the ladder whose 
steps were set too wide apart. He noticed that even this 
slight effort drove at once the sweat through his pores and 
made the blood pulsate in his temples ; and his respect 
increased for these fellows who had been working since 
sunrise — and who had chosen to live and work in this 
God-forsaken spot to the end of their days, provided they 
were not kicked out or bumped off. 

“ Why don’t you take that bloody jacket off ? ” he asked 
as he arrived puffing on the platform. “ Got the shivers ? ” 

“ It doesn’t matter,” said Bauman with his broad smile. 

Matthews divined that for Bauman his leather jacket was 
a kind of uniform and that he regarded it as a symbol of his 
authority as an officer of their famous illegal Haganah . 
Below them, at the foot of the tower, Glickstein and Co. 
were still talking in Hebrew to old Wabash, who, leaning 
on a spade which served him mainly for ornamental pur- 
poses, looked more than ever like a biblical prophet. “ What 
is he saying ? ” Matthews asked Bauman. 

“ He is excited about the roofs,” said Bauman. “ He 
would like to see them finished. According to Ottoman 
Law once a house had a roof on it nobody had a right to 
tear it down, even if it was built without the landowner’s 
permission,” 



THE FIRST DAY 


47 


“ But is that law still in force ? ” 

44 No.” 

“ So what ? ” 

44 It was in old Wabash’s time. In this country traditions 
have a thousand lives, like cats.” 

4 4 Do you believe the Arabs really care whether there is 
a roof or not ? ” 

44 No. But old Wabash does,” said Bauman, and his 
smile broadened. 

Matthews let his eyes wander and take in the landscape 
from the height of the tower : all those arid and yet softly 
undulating hills, now ochre-coloured under the flaming sky ; 
a silent landscape which bore the hallmark of eternity. With 
a sigh of regret he turned again to the messy camp. Twenty 
yards to their left, they weie unloading the last truck; it 
contained slates for the roofs and some bales of barbed wire 
which were urgently needed to complete the fence. They 
were all slightly nervous and in a hurry now ; some had 
torn their fingers in handling the heavy barbed-wire rolls 
without even noticing it. On the top of the truck stood 
Dina, in her khaki shorts and blue open-necked shirt, legs 
apart, handing down slates. Her palms were torn by the 
wire and from time to time she lifted them absently to her 
mouth, licking the blood off them. Her face, trickling with 
sweat, glistened like metal in the sun ; her smooth brown 
hair was all over her face and shoulders. Bauman too was 
looking at Dina. 

44 That kid’s a knock-out,” Matthews said. 44 To which 
one is she married . . . does she live with ? ” he corrected 
himself awkwardly. 

44 She lives with nobody,” said Bauman. 

44 But I guess most of them do ? ” Matthews had to force 
himself to go on. He hated nosing into these people’s 
privacy, but after all it was his job to find out about the 
ways and habits of their community. 

44 Most of them do,” said Bauman laconically. 

44 Look,” said Matthews, 44 I guess you wish me to hell, 
but I would like to get this whole business straight.” 



48 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ It is quite straight/’ said Bauman with his amused 
smile. Then, to avoid being impolite, he added : 

“ Dina is a special case. She comes from Central Europe 
and didn’t get away in time. They did certain things to her. 
She hasn’t quite got over them yet. . . .” 

He left it at that, rubbing his cheek. Matthews did not 
press him further ; Bauman had a quality of being frank and 
elusive at the same time. They all had it, these youngsters ; 
they gave the impression of having nothing to hide, but lots 
of things they refused to talk about to outsiders. As long 
as they talked to you they did it with complete sincerity ; 
but when they shut up, there was an air of finality about 
them. 

The group which had been standing at the foot of the 
ladder was no longer there ; Glickstein and old Wabash 
had climbed into one of the dug-outs and were explaining 
something to each other with sweeping gestures, squatting 
on their heels. Winter had disappeared, but after a while 
Matthews discovered him hanging on precariously with one 
hand to the roof of the dining-hut and with the other driving 
nails into the girders. “ He will fall down in a minute,” 
said Matthews, pointing at him. 

“ Winter is all right,” said Bauman. “ He used to be a 
slater in Tel Aviv before he became a Labour leader and 
member of the Executive.” 

“ And Glickstein ? ” 

“ Oh — he is in the Political Department. . . .” He 
again left it at that and lifted the field-glasses to his eyes : 
they were signalling from the opposite hill-top. Matthews 
had a feeling of being unwanted and climbed down the 
ladder. He wandered about rather aimlessly for a while, 
then stopped near one of the trenches. The boys were 
working in the same dogged, sullen silence as an hour before. 
Dasha, the nice fattish girl, was walking along the row, 
handing them mugs of cool water from an Arab clay jug. 
They swilled the water round their palates before swallowing 
it and spilled the last drops over their handkerchiefs which 
they wore nightcap-fashion on their heads. Their faces were 



THE FIRST DAY 49 

smeared with sweat and dirt, their lips dry and cracked ; 
they worked with slow, automatic movements. 

After a while something in the expression of one of the 
workers — a thin, narrow-chested, short-sighted boy with 
pimples on his face — caught Matthews’ attention. He had 
slowed down in his work ; presently his movements became 
vague and tottering, as if he were drunk or asleep. Suddenly 
he stopped altogether, leaning on the swaying handle of his 
spade ; his neighbour was just in time to catch him in his 
arms before the boy crashed into the trench. There was 
only a slight commotion while the boy was carried into the 
first-aid tent ; and without quite knowing how it came about, 
Matthews had taken over his spade and place, and was 
shovelling earth and rubble out of the trench. His neigh- 
bours made no comment ; they carried on steadily as if 
nothing had happened. The next time Dasha passed with 
her jar, he removed his cork helmet and replaced it by his 
handkerchief which Dasha wetted for him, her thick lips 
smiling pleasantly in her pretty and rather dumb face. 
Matthews felt elated and a fool. He worked on steadily, 
trying to be economical in his movements and to get into 
the rhythm of his neighbours. After a while he saw Dr. 
Lustig prowl with his Leica towards the trench, manoeuvring 
himself into position. Matthews managed to catch the right 
second to stick his tongue out and pull a face just before the 
camera clicked. Dr. Lustig put on a rather strained smile, 
but the boys in the trench grinned approval and Matthews 
felt that at that moment he had passed a kind of test in this 
tough and elusive community of Jew-boys. 

By 5 p.m. the shower installation was finished ; half an 
hour later the roof of the living-hut was completed, and a 
few minutes afterwards that of the dining-hut too. The 
putting in of the furniture took less than an hour. There 
were ten deal tables with forms for the dining-hall, provid- 
ing accommodation for sixty people, and four mattresses for 
each of the six cubicles in the living-hut ; the rest had to 
sleep in the tents. 



50 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


At 6 p.m., shortly before sunset, the truck with the gravel 
arrived. The relief with which it was greeted betrayed in 
retrospect the anxiety which all had felt about its arriving 
too late. The gravel was dumped in two heaps in front of 
the stockades ; and while the new settlers, who were going 
to stay, began filling the gravel into the gaps, the Helpers 
stacked their tools at the tower and took their places in the 
waiting lorries of the homeward convoy. There had been 
some suggestion about speeches to be made before they went 
back, but they had worked on the trenches till the last 
possible moment and now they had to hurry if they did not 
want to be caught in the wadi by the darkness. Old Wabash 
looked disappointed ; he had prepared a beautiful speech 
full of the suffering milliohnim. The boy who had fainted 
at the trench sat fast asleep in the seat next to the driver of 
one of the trucks. Matthews sat once more with his broad 
back squeezed in between Glickstein and Winter ; the small 
private car looked like a toy in the file of heavy lorries. The 
farewells were hurried and, on the part of those who left, 
of a rather forced cheerfulness. They felt sleepy and ex- 
hausted; as they stood tightly crammed in their lorries 
while the engines started up, and bent down for a last hand- 
shake with the new settlers, they already looked like strangers 
to the place. 

The first truck started with an abrupt jerk ; after a few 
moments’ interval the second followed ; soon the whole 
convoy moved with painful jolts down the new track and 
vanished at the foot of the slope. After a while they came 
into sight again, considerably diminished in size, down in 
the wadi. By then it was already growing dark, and one 
after another the lorries switched their headlights on as they 
receded into the dusk. The hum of their engines and the 
farewell greetings of their horns could be heard until the last 
truck had disappeared round the wadi’s bend, this time for 
good ; and then the silence fell, and with it, the night. 



THE FIRST DAY 


51 


7 

There were five and twenty of them ; twenty men and five 
women. The rest of the Commune, twelve more women 
and three babies, were to join them after the first week. 

As a group, they had been in existence for five years — 
years of training and preparation. They came mostly from 
the youth movements of Central Europe, with a sprinkling 
of Russians, Poles and Balkanese, and one young English- 
man. The core of the group had been formed on the 
immigrants’ ship from Trieste to Haifa. On arrival they 
had registered the group at the Hebrew Trade Unions’ 
Agricultural Department. The Agricultural Department 
had entered them into the list of other groups waiting to 
be settled on land purchased by the National Fund. The 
funds of the National Fund came from the blue collecting- 
boxes in synagogues and Jewish meeting-places all over the 
world, and from private donations. Most of the land bought 
by the National Fund was derelict and consisted of swamps, 
sand dunes, waterless desert and fields of stone. All land 
acquired by the Fund became unalienable property of the 
nation and was leased to the settlers for forty-nine years, 
to be renewed in subsequent generations. The settlers 
drained the swamps, planted trees on the dunes, dug irri- 
gation channels, carried the stones from the fields, built 
terraces and resurrected the land. They had no capital and 
needed none ; they received equipment and credit from 
public funds and repaid them when the land bore fruit ; 
while the rent for the ground went back to their landlord, 
the nation. 

While waiting for their turn to be settled, the members 
of the group had worked as hired labourers ; but already 
during that period of preparation they had paid their wages 
into the communal purse and had lived in common house- 
hold. At times the group had had to split up : some of them 
went to work in the potash factory on the Dead Sea, while 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


52 

others found seasonal employment in the orange plantations 
of Samaria and a third batch went through vocational train- 
ing in one of the older Communes of the Valley of Jezreeh 
At other times the whole group had been reunited ; but 
whether together or not, they had regarded themselves as 
members of one family or order, with as yet no settled 
domicile. Their average age when they had come to the 
Land had been eighteen ; now it was three and twenty. 
Couples had formed and re-formed during these years of 
preparation, and some of them had become stable unions. 
A few had found partners from outside who had been 
accepted as members, a few others had left the group. At 
present the group consisted of twenty men and seventeen 
women, two-thirds of whom were regarded as living in stable 
unions ; and of three children, all under the age of two. 

They had been adolescents when they arrived, and now 
they were men and women hardened by experience. They 
had undergone certain transformations during those years, 
but as the change had been gradual and simultaneous, they 
were not aware of it. The men had become less talkative, 
their movements slower and more deliberate ; the women’s 
faces had grown coarser under the hard climate and work, 
and they had a tendency to develop strong hips and breasts. 
But though they had aged in experience and changed in 
appearance twice the value of that time, they still regarded 
those five years as nothing but a prelude, a prehistoric era, 
the embryonic stage in the life of the Commune, which was 
really to start on the Day of Settlement. For five long and 
hard years they had waited for that day, dreamed of that 
day, schemed and prepared for it ; and now the day had 
come — and after the day, the night. 



THE FIRST DAY 


53 


8 

The silence which fell when the last lorry had turned its 
back on them and was swallowed up by the dusk had only 
been a short one, for they recovered quickly and went on 
shovelling gravel into the stockade. But during that short 
moment or two they had felt like children who, after being 
told to be brave, were left alone in an empty house where 
the silent shadows crept in through the windows and re- 
flections in mirrors froze into horrible masks. In that moment 
most of them would gladly have jumped onto the crowded 
trucks to be carried back, out of the horror of these archaic 
hills and their savage tribesmen, back to the safety of their 
own race and kin. 

The night came quickly. The searchlight on the top of 
the watch-tower was on ; its sharp white beam was directed 
in an acute angle downward onto the stockade. They went 
on filling in the gravel under a shower of dazzling light which 
made the outer darkness even thicker and more impenetrable. 

By 7 p.m. the work was finished. The reflector lifted its 
beam into the air, and slowly lowered it again as it began its 
patient revolutions round and round, sweeping the terrain 
beyond the barbed-wire fence with its white broom of light. 
The dug-outs and the observation post on the watch-tower 
were manned ; there was nothing else to be done. Those 
not on guard duty filed silently into the dining-room for the 
first hot meal in their new home. 

The dining-room had as yet no electric light ; there were 
candles on the tables and a single oil-lamp near the door. 
The kitchen was behind a wooden partition, and the food 
came out through a hatch in it, with a counter in front. 
They had onion soup, bully beef and oranges ; and, to mark 
the occasion, a cupful each of sweet white Carmel wine. 
Apart from the twenty-five settlers, only Bauman and ten of 
the Haganah boys had stayed behind, and if all went well 
these too would go in a few days, to wherever they were 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


54 

needed next. Thirty men were enough to man the trenches, 
and they only had twenty rifles and two automatics to go 
round anyway. It was a principle that each Commune had 
to be self-supporting from the beginning, and that included 
defence as well. 

Joseph had as usual succeeded in sitting next to Dina ; 
on her other side sat Reuben and opposite them Dasha and 
Simeon. All five held responsible positions in the Com- 
mune, and though strictly speaking places were to be 
occupied in the order of arrival, they usually sat together 
at meals. 

Joseph looked across the dim, stuffy dining-hall. There 
were no candlesticks, and the cheap candles were stuck on 
the deal tables in little pools of frozen tallow. Hardly any- 
body talked ; the men slouched on the forms like exhausted 
animals. At the table next to theirs a boy with a round, 
puffed, vacant face sat with his cheek propped against his 
left hand, while the right half-consciously spooned soup into 
his mouth. His neighbour slept with his chin on his arms. 
Everywhere Joseph saw the same slumping figures, their 
jaws in slow grinding movement as they chewed their food. 

So this was their bridal night with the earth. At regular 
intervals the beam of the searchlight passed over the roof of 
the hut ; its lower fringe swept through the upper part of 
the windows and through the room, forcing the diners to 
avert their faces or close their eyes. They might as well 
have been on an island with a lighthouse in the middle of 
the ocean. The darkness outside was complete and the wind 
whined and whistled in protest at the unexpected obstacle 
on its ancient course through the hills. 

Joseph was struck by the ugliness of the faces around 
him as they were lit up in the intermittent ghastly flash of 
the searchlight. It was not the first time that he had noticed 
it, but to-night his revulsion against this assembly of thick, 
curved noses, fleshy lips and liquid eyes was particularly 
strong. At moments it seemed to him that he was sur- 
rounded by masks of archaic reptiles. Perhaps he was 
over-tired and the one cup of sweet wine had gone straight 



THE FIRST DAY 


55 

to his head. But it was no good denying to himself that 
he disliked them, and that he hated even more the streak 
of the over-ripe race in himself. The only oasis was Dina ; 
but then Dina only half belonged to them like himself, 
though in a different way. The other girls made him 
shudder in incestuous revulsion. Their flesh had lost its 
innocence from birth or before. They might be chaste and 
prim, and yet some acrid spice of their intellect permeated 
the very pores of their bodies. That knowingness expanded 
over the nervous surface of their skin, destroyed their 
capacity for self-forgetfulness. They were saturated with 
the long experience of the race which lingered in their eyes 
and on their skin like the heat of the former occupant in 
a chair. 

“ You can have the rest of this,” he heard Dina say, 
pushing her cup of wine to him. “ It’s too sweet for me.” 

“ Blessed be the grape,” said Joseph, lifting the cup and 
emptying it. And blessed be Dina, my oasis, he thought. 
Without her it would be the desert. But alas, she is the 
mirage, not the well. 

“ What has happened to the searchlight ? ” asked Dasha. 
The periodic flashes had stopped for the last minute. 

“ Signalling,” said Reuben with his mouth full. “ Bau- 
man is talking to Gan Tamar.” 

Reuben is all right, thought Joseph. He liked Reuben’s 
laconic matter-of-factness, his unvarying even temper. 
Reuben was neither witty nor brilliant ; he completely lacked 
vanity and ambition. His leadership was based mainly on 
his lack of negative qualities, on a kind of neutral personality 
which offered no points for attack and made him the socially 
ideal type for collective life. 

“ I hope Bauman won’t forget to tell them to send up my 
carrots to-morrow,” said Dasha. Dasha was in charge of 
the communal kitchen and a stickler about the right vitamin 
diet ; she had been through a training course. 

“Bauman never forgets anything,” said Dina — a re- 
mark which Joseph disliked. His mood, when he was near 
her, was like a precision barometer on an April day ; every- 



56 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

thing she said, however apparently remote from personal 
implications, produced a change. 

“ What did you think of our guests ? ” he asked. “ That 
female walked about the camp as if she were inspecting a 
zoo.” 

“ She was the typical English aristocrat,” said Dasha, 
who was a fervent socialist and had never spoken to a live 
Englishman. 

“ Aristocrat my foot,” said Joseph. “ She is what they 
call at home the lower middle class, and what in the colonies 
becomes the ruling class. It is a kind of Pygmalion-miracle 
which is automatically performed each time a P. & O. liner 
passes Gibraltar. The whole Empire is a kind of glorified 
suburbia.” 

“ Pygmalion was written by G. B. Shaw,” stated Dasha. 

“ Look,” cried Dina, mimicking Mrs. Newton and point- 
ing at Simeon. “ He reads his paper from right to left. Isn’t 
it funny ? ” In Europe Dina had studied for the stage. By 
sucking in her lips and pushing out her chin and drawing 
in her nostrils she managed to give her face a pinched, 
hag-like expression. They all laughed, except Simeon who 
had not spoken a word during the whole meal. Now that 
he had become the target of Dina’s act, he lifted his gaze 
from his plate. 

“ There was no need for Bauman to be polite to that 
Police officer,” he said. “ Nor for you, Reuben.” 

“ We were correct to them, that’s all,” said Reuben. 

“ Precisely,” said Simeon. He put his fork down. “ We 
keep on being correct and the Arabs keep on shooting. 
Result : the Arabs are appeased and we pay the bill.” 

“ We have had that out before,” said Reuben, whose 
mind was on to-morrow’s tasks : the reinforcement of the 
trenches, the installation of electric light, the laying of the 
foundations for the cowshed. 

“ But Simeon is right,” said Dina. The barometer rose : 
if Dina supported Simeon, then her previous praise of 
Bauman had also to be seen in a purely objective light. 

“ Pressure demands counter- pressure,” said Simeon* 



THE FIRST DAY 57 

44 Otherwise we shall continue to lose ground. The only 
answer to violence is retaliation.” 

“ An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth ,’ 9 said Dasha 
with her rather silly laugh. 

44 No,” said Simeon. 44 It has nothing to do with ethics. 
The concept of revenge is archaic and absurd. We have to 
counter terror by terror for purely logical reasons.” 

The discussion had attracted some people from other 
tables. They lingered around them, with one foot on the 
bench and elbows propped on the table. 

44 I don’t believe in terror,” said Dasha. She had the 
stubborn aggressiveness of the female arguing against an 
intellectually superior partner. 

44 No, you don’t,” said Simeon with trenchant sarcasm, 
44 but you believe in carrots because of vitamin A. What 
you mean to say is that you don’t like terror. It disagrees 
with your conditioning. I dislike carrots. They disagree 
with my conditioning. But I eat them — because they 
contain vitamin A.” 

44 So what ? ” said Dasha, who had been unable to follow. 

44 So we shall eat no more carrots,” said Reuben with his 
conciliatory smile. 

44 Talking of logic,” said Joseph. 44 Arab terrorism is 
directed partly against us, partly against the Government. 
So to restore your equilibrium we would not only have to 
retaliate against the Arabs, but also to terrorise the Govern- 
ment.” 

44 It will depend on their attitude,” said Simeon with 
deliberate elusiveness, after a moment’s silence. 

44 But we know their attitude,” Dina burst out. 44 They 
hate us ; they all hate us like that female to-day. I saw it 
in her eyes, that look of suburban hatred. I bet she has a 
photograph of the sweet little Fuehrer. She must — all 
suburban haters adore him. Because he tells them what a 
noble feeling their pet-hatred is and because he wears his 
hair plastered down like the hairdresser’s assistant of their 
dreams. . . .” 

Her full, violent mouth dropped at the corners, and for 

E 



58 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

a moment it looked as if she was going to cry. 

“ All right, Dina/’ said Joseph gently, “ all this we know. 
But Simeon has not answered my question.” 

“ We have to force them to change their attitude,” said 
Simeon. 

“ Force them — how ? ” 

“ By our achievements,” said Reuben quietly. 

u By whatever means we find expedient,” said Simeon. 

It had become quiet around them. There was now quite 
a crowd round their table. Joseph, while following the 
argument with one half of his mind, observed with the other 
how Simeon grew in stature when he had an audience. 
Practically everybody here was opposed to the views he held, 
but they listened to him with a reluctant admiration, and 
the longer they listened the stronger became his spell over 
them. They followed the argument with an inward-turned 
look, as if searching for an answer which they did not quite 
dare to face. 

“ Let us get this quite clear,” said Joseph, who had 
grown pale. “ Assuming they don’t change their policy 
towards us. And assuming there is further persecution in 
Europe which leads to a mass exodus ” 

“ Why assuming ? ” Simeon interrupted with cold irony. 
“ The synagogues in Europe are burning and our girls are 
walked through their towns with sandwich-boards round 
their necks inviting passers-by to spit into their faces.” 

“ Oh, shut up,” said Dasha with a note of hysteria in 
her voice. 

“ Why shut up ? ” Simeon continued in the same acid 
manner. As it happens, it happened to my sister. Don’t 
look like that ; why does it make any difference whether it’s 
my sister or somebody else’s ? She was just a fat, dumb 
girl like Dasha, name of Rose. She studied chemistry.” 

There was a silence, then Dina said in a constrained voice : 

“ Why did you never speak about it before ? ” 

“ Why should I speak about it ? I came to be a peasant 
in my country, not to the wailing wall. I only mentioned 
it because of Joseph’s 4 assuming Well, let’s go on with 



THE FIRST DAY 


59 

our assumptions. I assume that the British won't change 
their policy unless we force them to. I have studied their 
history, their traditions, their methods. If the auto-da-fes 
are resurrected in Europe and our people burnt alive, they 
will be very indignant about it. They will write letters to 
their newspapers, ask questions in their Parliament and their 
Bishops will pray for our souls. But if some wretched sur- 
vivors ask to be let into this our promised land, they will 
talk of economic difficulties and the poor dispossessed Arabs. 
And if the wretches won't listen to reason and come swim- 
ming for their lives across the sea, they will put barbed wire 
on our beaches and let them drown. . . 

He closed his eyes for a moment. Something extra- 
ordinary was happening to him, something which he had 
never experienced before. He saw the drowning people 
before his eyes. It was a sharp, short flash which lasted only 
a split second but was fantastically clear. There were 
hundreds of them, with arms and legs sticking out of the 
water, but there was no sound and the whole scene was laid 
out on a calm and peaceful sea basking in the hot sun. 

There was a heavy silence, in which Reuben said drily : 

“ I think Simeon is exaggerating. At any rate I don’t 
think we can gain anything by imitating Fascist methods.” 

Unnoticed by most of them, Bauman had entered the 
hut a few minutes before, and had remained standing at the 
door, listening to Simeon’s speech. Dina saw him ; in the 
prolonged silence she asked : 

“ And what do you think, Bauman ? ” 

They all turned their heads. 

“ I share Simeon's opinion,” Bauman said curtly. “ By 
the way, Dasha, your carrots will be here first thing in the 
morning.” 

Bauman’s entry broke the spell. Naphtali, a short dark 
boy with a squint who had so far restrained himself with 
some effort, began savagely to attack Simeon, but nobody 
listened to him. They all crowded round Bauman to hear 
the latest news from the outside world. Simeon too wanted 



60 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

to get up, but Naphtali didn't let him. “ I don’t believe in 
violence,” he cried. “ I hate violence. We have to come 
to an understanding with the Arabs. ...” 

“ But if they don’t wish to come to an understanding with 
you ? ” said Simeon, who had regained his calm and his 
caustic tone. 

“ We have to educate them. We must get them to join 
our trade unions. We have to emancipate the fellaheen and 
break the influence of their priests and replace their chauvin- 
ism by class-consciousness.” 

“ And how long will this modest programme take to be 
carried out ? ” 

“ I don’t know. It doesn’t matter.” 

“ No, it doesn’t. Our people will wait on the burning 
stakes until we have finished.” 

He pushed past the excited youth and walked out into 
the darkness. They paid no attention to him. They were 
listening to Bauman’s news, passed on by heliograph from 
Gan Tamar where they had a wireless. But there wasn’t 
much in it. The Spanish rebels had occupied most of the 
Basque country and were closing in on Bilbao. The Council 
of the League had discussed the planned partition of the 
country into a Hebrew and an Arab state, proposed by the 
Royal Commission a few months ago, but there were as yet 
no details. . . . 

They did not comment on this last item ; they had dis- 
cussed the question of partition, its pros and cons, till they 
had become sick of it. Besides, nobody really believed that 
the Government would have the determination to carry the 
idea out. Joseph quoted a joke he had seen in an English 
paper : the best partition would be to let the Arabs have the 
country during the summer and the Jews during the winter ; 
— but only Dina and Bauman smiled. They all stood about 
irresolutely, wondering whether they should snatch a few 
hours’ sleep before they were called for guard duty, but a 
vague feeling of despondency, of a disappointing anticlimax, 
made them linger on. 

In the midst of this indecision the thin voice of a mouth- 



THE FIRST DAY 


6l 

organ filtered in from the darkness outside, grew stronger 
as it approached, and a moment later Mendl burst in through 
the door, blowing with puffed cheeks his mouth-organ and 
lifting his knees high into the air, in the marching pose of 
the Pied Piper. He seemed unconscious of the crowd, 
stalked straight into the centre of the hut, and broke into 
the tune of “ God will rebuild Galilee ”, swaying and 
squirming with his hunchbacked body to the swift vigorous 
rhythm of the tune. He gave the impression of being drunk, 
but they knew that he was merely seized by one of his sudden 
moods, when the otherwise quiet and rather silent little 
Mendl became possessed by a kind of craze, spontaneous and 
irresistible. Like fog under a violent gust of wind, the stupor 
which had lain on them burst into shreds. They kicked the 
forms aside and ran the tables against the wall, clearing an 
open space in the centre of the hut where already the dark 
squinting boy and two others had formed the first ring of 
the horra, the stamping and swaying round-dance, a savage 
ring-polka. Others joined in ; with arms interlaced round 
each other’s shoulders and heads thrown back, they formed 
a wheel which now spun round as they all raced clockwise 
to the left, now halted, swaying in and outward as they 
stamped their feet shouting the refrain of the song, their 
bodies leaning back almost to the horizontal. The wheel 
broke and re-formed as more dancers joined in and threw 
their arms round their neighbours’ shoulders, thus welding 
it again. Soon the circle became too large for the hut ; part 
of it tore itself off and formed a second, smaller ring inside 
the first, spinning in the opposite sense ; and then a third 
concentric ring, of five dancers only, formed inside the 
second, spinning again in the reverse direction. The whole 
horra was like a whirling eddy, giddy and rapturous ; and 
in its centre stood, all by himself, Mendl with his mouth- 
organ, swaying and squirming like an ecstatic dervish. 

Joseph stood by the door, watching the dancers. Their 
faces, thrown back and turned towards the ceiling, were 
covered with sweat ; many of them had closed their eyes. 
When they stopped racing round to shout out the refrain, 



62 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


the three magic syllables of hag-al~il burst from their lips 
like savage barks. When they resumed their circular race, 
their mouths remained half open in a self-forgetful, pant- 
ing rapture. Thus transfigured, they no longer appeared 
to Joseph ugly and reptilious, but like some stylised Assyrian 
or Sumerian carving come to life in the flickering light of 
the candles. His feet had begun to stamp out the torrential 
rhythm of the dance, his body to sway, he longed to be 
swallowed up in the whirling eddy. He glanced at Dina who 
stood next to him. She shook her head. “ But you go,” 
she said, trying to sound casual. He hesitated for a second, 
then took a short run, leapt into the air with outstretched 
arms and broke into the chain. Before the drunkenness of 
the dance got complete hold of him he saw Dina walk out 
of the hut ; but at that moment he did not care. 

Dina walked quickly across the dark square to the living- 
hut and entered the cubicle which she shared with Dasha 
and two other girls. Fortunately there was nobody in yet. 
For a second she stood still in the dark, stuffy little room, 
listening to the sound of the mouth-organ, the shouts and 
stamping of feet from the dining-hut. Then the tension in 
her snapped and she threw herself face down on her bunk. 
Her shoulders shook and her teeth bit into the straw mattress 
to stifle the sound of her gulping sobs. After a while she 
fell asleep, fully dressed, and was only woken two hours later 
by the crash of the first volley fired against the palisades. 


9 

The trouble with Dina was that she could not bear to 
be touched. It was curious to watch, when somebody 
touched her, a coarse gooseflesh spread on her skin and her 
face begin to quiver. She could put her hand on a man’s, 
or lay her arm round his shoulder, but winced in sup- 
pressed panic if he tried to do the same to her. She would 
sit on a form at the dining-table and suddenly become 



THE FIRST DAY 


63 

conscious of her shoulder or hip touching her neighbour’s ; 
she would shrink into herself and make herself small and 
try to control her trembling so as not to offend the other ; 
and after a while she would get up and slink unobtrusively 
out of the room, with her meal unfinished. Doctors had 
been consulted and had asked her questions which she re- 
fused to answer ; they had suggested drugs, hypnosis, 
psycho-therapy, but it all pointed in one direction, and she 
refused to let anybody touch upon the thing to forget. 

Dina’s father had been editor of a distinguished Liberal 
daily newspaper in the town of Frankfurt-on-Main. It was 
a patrician paper in a patrician town. She remembered her 
father as a frail, middle-aged man with gout-bent fingers, a 
very soft voice and a pointed greyish beard, pacing up and 
down the worn path on the carpet in the library which one 
could only enter on tiptoe, or writing with his back to the 
room at an old-fashioned standing-desk. He had published 
books on Federal Union, Pan-Europa, against militarism in 
general, and in his own country in particular ; he had been 
a delegate at various disarmament conferences and a candi- 
date for the Nobel Prize for Peace. He fought nationalism 
in every form and disguise, adhered to no Church or religious 
community, and regarded his race as an accident of birth. 
When the National Socialists came into power he refused to 
go abroad, but was persuaded by his friends to hide. Dina, 
then seventeen, was to join her mother, who lived, separated 
from her husband, in the south of France. She was arrested 
at the frontier and kept for six months, during which they 
tried to find out from her her father’s whereabouts. When 
they let her out she was told that her father had given himself up 
to obtain her release and had died shortly afterwards in a non- 
specified way. — During those six months, when they kept 
on trying, methodically, scientifically, ingeniously, to make 
her betray her father’s hide-out, happened the things to forget. 

On the whole she was gay and composed. Somewhere 
inside her the memory of those things lay encrusted, like a 
bullet which had not been extracted, in its cocoon of insulating 
tissue. Normally the injured is unconscious of it except 



64 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

when touched near the scar ; and Dina’s scar expanded over 
the whole immaculate surface of her body. 


10 

The first volley came shortly after midnight. It found them 
mentally unprepared. Although the probability of an attack 
had been the whole day at the back of their minds, the 
tension had gradually relaxed as the night wore on. The 
horra had come to an end about an hour earlier, as abruptly 
as it had started, and those not on guard duty had tottered 
to their palliasses in complete exhaustion. When the shoot- 
ing woke them, they had the feeling of having closed their 
eyes only a minute ago. 

They ran towards their assigned posts, still dazed by 
sleep but automatically keeping their heads down. After the 
first salvo it had become quiet again ; the men in the dug- 
outs had orders to fire only when they saw the attackers, 
and for the time being they could see nothing. The trouble 
was that the hill had the wrong shape. It was shaped rather 
like the back of a camel, but with three instead of two humps. 
They sat on top of the southern or rear hump with the two 
others in front of them, the camel’s head pointing north as 
it were. For this reason they had built two dug-outs facing 
north side by side, and only one each facing in the other three 
directions. The northern communicating trench was also 
the deepest. 

In front of the northern trench ran the barbed wire, and 
immediately beyond it the ground sloped down into a hollow, 
and beyond that hollow came the second hump less than a 
hundred yards away ; and another hundred yards further 
the third. The height of each hillock was only about fifty 
feet, but this was quite enough to hide and protect the raiders. 
Bauman had thought of putting observation posts on each 
of the other two humps, but he had dropped the idea. There 
had been no time to fortify them, and the outposts, exposed 



THE FIRST DAY 


65 

from all directions, would have been bumped off at once. 

As was to be expected, the salvo had been fired from the 
north, either from behind the second or the third hump. 

The moon was due to rise in about an hour, and the sky 
was heavily clouded. The beam of the searchlight crept 
slowly along the top of the second hillock, then swept with 
equal care through the hollow, stopping here and there at a 
suspect bush of thistle or camel-thorn which grew in clusters 
out of the rock like ugly tufts of hair from a wart. But it 
could not penetrate through the rock and could not even 
expose the chinks and holes behind the stones, filling them 
instead with sharp, ink-black trembling shadows which acted 
rather unpleasantly on the defenders’ imagination. Bauman 
and the other leaders of the Haganah had known for some 
time that these famous watch-tower reflectors were not much 
good for the task of spotting snipers who knew how to exploit 
each nook and cranny of the terrain ; they kept them up 
mainly for the sake of their psychological effect on both the 
raiders and defenders. 

The lull lasted about a minute. Then the searchlight 
performed one of its periodic quick sweeps round the hill to 
make sure that no surprise threatened from the flanks or 
rear ; and during these few seconds of darkness the second 
volley came crashing in from the north. This time the 
trench and the two dug-outs facing north were fully manned, 
and the defenders could see the gun-flashes like sparks of 
St. Elmo’s fire all round the next hillock. Bauman ordered 
fire and presently about twenty rifles spat out a rather ragged 
volley, most of the men firing for the first time in their lives 
at human targets. 

Joseph, who also belonged to this category, stood in the 
left northern dug-out. His heart drummed, he felt an 
annoying pressure in the bladder, and after the second volley 
of the attackers he lost a few drops of his water. At the 
same time he was in a way enjoying himself. * That happens 
to everybody the first time in battle,’ he told himself serenely. 
A bullet whined past, quite close so it seemed. * A hail of 
bullets round my bloody head,’ he explained to himself. 



66 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Then he heard Bauman’s voice from the other dug-out to 
the right, giving the command to fire. ‘ Now then/ he 
thought, 4 hold your breath, close your left eye, aim slightly 
low on the target at six o’clock/ But there was no target. 
He pulled the trigger and was deafened by the crash. 4 At 
night it sounds louder/ he thought. 4 Now we must wait 
for a gun-flash and fire at it immediately.’ He did so, and 
would have given a lot to know whether he had hit something. 

4 Ha,’ he told himself, 4 that’s the hunting passion awaken- 
ing.’ He began positively to enjoy himself. 

For a while there were only isolated shots from both sides. 
Then Bauman yelled 44 Hold it for a minute.” Bauman had 
so far not fired a single shot, only waited for the gun-flashes. 
Now he lifted his Lewis and gave a long burst, methodically 
sweeping round the dark contours of the hump in front. 
Joseph saw the flaming muzzle slowly move round in an arc 
and thought it was a beautiful curve. He regretted that they 
had no red tracer bullets for fireworks. 

To his right stood the squinting youngster Naphtali, and 
beyond him Reuben, who had the second Lewis gun and 
was in charge of their dug-out. Naphtali was fumbling about 
with his rifle, trying to put a new magazine in, but his hands 
shook and in the end Reuben took the rifle and pressed the 
magazine in for him. 44 Don’t waste your ammunition,” he 
said in his usual businesslike voice. 44 And don’t get rattled. 
This isn’t serious. There are no more than sixty or eighty 
of them.” Joseph thought resentfully that the youngster had 
already wasted a full magazine while he had only fired thrice 
and regarded each pull on the trigger as a special treat. 

This went on for about half an hour and Joseph began to 
feel bored. Once or twice he thought of Dina who, together 
with little Mendl and another girl, was in charge of the first- 
aid tent, but he knew that she was reasonably safe behind 
the stockade. Only Naphtali at his side irritated him. The 
boy was very nervous and apparently obsessed by the idea 
that the attackers might have sneaked unobserved into the 
hollow in front of the barbed wire, and might pounce on 
them at any moment. Twice he had exposed his head over 



THE FIRST DAY 


67 

the parapet to peer down the incline in front, and had 
stammered some confused apology when Reuben sharply 
ordered him to take cover. 

About 1 a.m. a gale sprang up, with the suddenness and 
ferocity peculiar to these hills. Towards the east the clouds 
tore apart and for a minute the moon appeared, travelling 
rapidly across drifts of black steam ; then the gap was filled 
up again with low, heavy cloud and an instant later the rain 
came down in torrents, its hard, blinding jets lashing at the 
defenders’ faces almost horizontally. 

Since the first sharp gust of wind Joseph had felt by 
instinct that things were going wrong. The density of the 
rain made the searchlight practically useless. The glitter of 
the beam on the streaks of falling water produced a strangely 
theatrical effect, but behind this wavering curtain of white 
threads anything might indeed happen now. The youngster 
at Joseph’s side became increasingly fidgety ; Joseph had 
just pulled his head down with a hard grip on the back of 
his neck when the light suddenly went out. There was some 
confused shouting from the other dug-out and for a second 
Joseph felt touched by panic ; he had the sensation of an 
icy jet injected into his veins. He fired three shots as a 
special treat aimlessly into the rain and regained his self- 
control. It took some time until his eyes became adjusted 
to the darkness ; in the now total night around them the 
splash and splutter of the rain sounded louder while the 
firing of the enemy seemed more remote. He heard Reuben 
shout : “ Cable short-circuited — nothing serious — pass it 
on,” and he passed the message on to the Auxiliary crouching 
in the connecting trench to his left. He thought that the 
ancient tongue never sounded more melodious than when 
shouted through wind and rain in the night ; it was a wild 
and tragic language unfit for small talk. The cloudburst 
seemed on the point of exhausting its power, the rush of 
water sounded thinner, and Joseph became aware that for 
some time already the noise of the enemy’s firing had changed 
in character : instead of single shots one could now hear the 
steady rattle of an automatic, a Lewis or a Bren. Apparently 



68 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

they had received reinforcements. 

He was still digesting this when a dull explosion made 
them all jump. It had come from behind them, from the 
direction of the square. Reuben yelled a command over 
Joseph's head which Joseph did not catch, but he saw the 
Auxiliary jump out of the trench and run with his head bent 
towards the square. “ The others stay,” Reuben yelled, and 
Joseph turned once again towards the attackers. In all his 
anxiety he thought that Reuben was a brick, and that it was 
a great comfort to obey blindly instead of having to decide 
what to do. The enemy's firing now sounded much nearer 
and Joseph wondered whether they had really got into the 
hollow. In a surprisingly short time he heard the splashing 
footsteps of the Auxiliary running back through the mud. 
“ Nothing,” he shouted while jumping back into the trench. 
“ Only tent B collapsed. Pass it on.” Joseph passed it on, 
and for the next few minutes he was busy shooting at a 
great number of gun-flashes which now were definitely nearer, 
on this side of the hump ; the enemy was obviously advan- 
cing towards the hollow, and both Reuben and Bauman were 
now using their automatics practically without pause. The 
noise became deafening, the squall had once more increased 
to its maximum strength, everything was dark and hellish. 
Joseph aimed and fired in quick succession at target-flashes 
which now seemed only a few yards away ; he felt his head 
swim and yet his fingers worked with smooth precision ; some- 
where at the back of his mind a last spark of self-conscious- 
ness marvelled at the nimble automaton which his body had 
become. He was aware of two sharp explosions in quick 
succession only a few yards ahead of him ; in the reddish 
bengal flashes which accompanied the detonations the sil- 
houette of the barbed wire emerged like a vision of a delicate 
etching, and vanished again ; then he realised that Reuben 
was throwing hand grenades at the barbed wire, his long 
dark arm swinging forward and back like a flail. Judging 
by the frequency of the explosions, Bauman and somebody 
on the other side were also throwing grenades. “ Give, 
give ! ” he yelled at Reuben, but Reuben bent over him 



THE FIRST DAY 


69 

across the crouching Naphtali and said quite calmly : “ No 
need. It was only to make sure they haven't crept up to the 
barbed wire." 

Joseph took that to mean that they hadn't, and felt re- 
lieved, though he did not understand how Reuben could tell. 
But his intellectual curiosity had left him entirely, and his 
only desire was to be an automaton and obey. The shooting 
calmed down a little, and then Joseph saw a vicious gun-flash 
directly in the line of his aim, and almost simultaneously 
he fired. He could not say why, but this time the act of 
pulling the trigger and the report seemed to be different 
from all the previous occasions and the wild idea crossed 
his brain that, just as some women were supposed to know 
by instinct the moment when they conceived, so a man might 
know the moment when he has killed. In fact, he was con- 
vinced of having hit ; he had the almost physical sensation 
of his bullet having been stopped by, and buried in, some 
dully and elastically resisting matter. A moment later the 
searchlight was on again. 

A wild cheer went up from the trench and Joseph felt the 
conviction sweep through his whole body that from now on 
they were safe. It was a sensation like drinking something 
hot and sugary when very tired ; its sweet warmth seemed 
to penetrate into all his tissues. Only now did he realise 
that his feet were all a-tremble and his knees on the point 
of giving way. He pulled a drenched cigarette out of his 
pocket but it disintegrated between his fingers. 

The return of the light seemed to have a demoralising 
effect on the raiders. Their fire became rather desultory and 
more distant. Doubtless they were retreating behind the 
farther slope of their hillock. That white, dazzling eye 
staring at them from its height like a watchful giant's, and 
its majestic, slow movement must be an uncanny sensation 
for them. 

Joseph badly wanted a cigarette and asked Naphtali 
whether he had a dry one, but the youngster gave no answer. 
He crouched in a curiously huddled-up position against the 
back of the parapet, and Joseph thought he had perhaps 



70 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

fainted. He went down on his knees by Naphtali’s side, 
reproaching himself for not having looked after him better, 
and groped for his face. Instead of a face his fingers found 
a soft, dripping mess and his forefinger went straight into 
some slushy cavity. He withdrew his hand with a cry and 
began shaking it wildly through the air as if he had burnt it. 
Reuben flashed his torch on the youngster and Joseph saw 
what he had touched, but only for a second. He turned to 
the other side and vomited. 

The youngster by the name of Naphtali had kept some 
hold on himself until the light went out. From that moment 
he had been a shaking, teeth-chattering bundle of horror. 
His brain, paralysed by toxic fear, held only one idea : that 
the killers had got into the hollow and would in the next 
second burst through the barbed wire. When Reuben 
started throwing his hand grenades, Naphtali finally went off 
his head. He jumped up and down on one spot, gurgling 
inarticulate sounds and biting his clenched fists. His neigh- 
bours were too busy to pay any attention to him. He went 
on leaping into the air like a joyful child, gurgling and 
whimpering, until something hit him massively in the eye. 
He thought it was Reuben, angry because he had not kept 
his head down ; and that Reuben did not have to hit him so 
hard. He saw great coloured circles spinning and crossing 
each other like flaming hoops that jugglers throw into the 
air, and everything became rather quiet ; only one last fiery 
wheel kept turning and expanding, until it too faded and 
only darkness and peace remained. 


11 


About 4 a.m. it became clear that the attack had been beaten 
off. No shot had been fired during the last half-hour ; the 
raiders must have returned to their own hills, anxious to 
reach their hide-outs before daybreak. Bauman sent the 



THE FIRST DAY 


71 

men to sleep, keeping only those on guard duty in the 
dug-outs. 

Joseph felt that he would be unable to sleep and decided 
to look in at the first-aid tent, hoping that Dina might still 
be on duty. He had learned that, besides Naphtali who was 
dead, two men had been wounded at the height of the attack : 
one of the Auxiliaries had been shot through the chest, and 
Mendl had received a bullet in his arm while repairing the 
electric cable, but had gone on until he had finished the job. 
Stamping through the mud with his torch, Joseph thought 
that his feet had never in his life felt so heavy. His mind 
was in a dreamy, floating haze, while his whole body seemed 
imbued with the consciousness of gravity. This, he thought, 
is what people on Jupiter must feel like, where every object 
weighs three times heavier than on the Earth. I wonder 
whether Jupiter too has its Jews. ... No doubt it has ; no 
species would be complete without its Jews ; they are the 
exposed nerve, an extreme condition of life. . . . There 
was light showing from the first-aid tent ; he lifted the flap 
and saw Dina making Turkish coffee over a spirit-lamp as 
if she were waiting for him. On a stretcher on the floor 
lay the wounded Auxiliary, covered with a rug, asleep. Dina 
had put the bright acetylene lamp out and lit candles instead. 
She seemed pleased to see him. He leaned his rifle carefully 
against the canvas and with a feeling of bliss squatted down 
on the floor. “ Where is Mendl ? ” he asked in a whisper. 

“ He is all right,” she said. “ It was only a flesh wound 
and he went to sleep in his own bed with his mouth-organ 
under the pillow. — You need not whisper ; he’s had a shot 
of morphia.” She spoke in a low murmur which sounded 
less strained than whispering, and more intimate. “ They 
are going to send the ambulance car from Gan Tamar first 
thing to-morrow morning.” 

“ It is to-morrow already,” said Joseph. 

She let a drop of cold water fall on the thick brown liquid 
in the shiny copper pot and poured it out into two small cups. 
Joseph sipped it voluptuously, leaning his back against the 
foot of the chair. 



72 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


Dina had a leather jacket wrapped round her shoulders, 
with its empty sleeves hanging down. She seemed to be 
shivering. There were dark-blue shadows under the lighter 
blue of her eyes and her hair kept falling into her face as if it 
were too tired to remain in its proper place. 

“ Would you like to wash your face ? ” she asked after 
a while. He touched his face with his fingers ; it was all 
grimy. He grinned, slowly shaking his head. “ Too lazy,” 
he said. “ Just let me sit for a while. You need not look 
at me.” 

He closed his eyes and after a while opened them again 
and saw that she was looking at him with a kind of approval. 

“ Reuben looked in before you came,” she said. “ He 
mentioned that you had done quite well.” 

So Dina had specially inquired after him, Joseph thought 
happily. And Reuben had approved of him. He suddenly 
felt the tears shoot into his eyes. Oh, it was good to be 
approved of. There was nothing better than to be approved 
of — to like and be liked. In that moment he was so full of 
a warm, simple certainty about everything that he felt no 
shame and no need to pose. He leaned his head against the 
foot of her chair, closed his eyes and let the tears run down 
his face. He felt that in this moment of abandon he lost 
his last chance of ever winning her. But the bliss of sur- 
render, of shedding all pretence, was stronger than his desire. 
It is finished, he thought, for it is I who am giving myself, 
not she. . . . 

The next time he opened his eyes he knew that he 
must have slept though he could not remember it. The 
candle had grown short and old, covered with knobs of 
tallow like a warted gnome. Dina had slumped down in her 
chair and was resting with her cheek on his shoulder, asleep. 
At a slight movement of his she woke and moved her head 
away. “ It will soon be day,” she said in a murmur. 

“ Another hour,” said Joseph. 

She lay back in her chair, shivering. The Auxiliary on 
the stretcher moved in his sleep. “ How did Naphtali die ? ” 
she asked after a while. 



THE FIRST DAY 


73 

44 I don’t know. We should have watched him. . . .” 
He remembered the unutterable contact of his hand with 
the slushy mass, and remained silent. 

44 Poor Naphtali,” said Dina. 44 I never liked him.” 

Joseph said nothing ; he felt no desire to speak or to 
move ; he only wished he could remain there for a while, 
leaning against the chair, limp and desireless. 

“ You know,” said Dina, “ I have never understood why 
you joined us. You don’t really fit in here.” 

“ Do you ? ” he said. 

44 That’s different. . . . But even by race you only half 
belong to us.” 

44 I have opted for the belonging half.” 

44 But why ? You would be happier among the others. 
Why won’t you tell ? ” 

44 There was some incident.” 

44 What incident ? ” 

44 Is this a confessional ? ” he asked tiredly. 

They remained silent for a while ; he could feel through 
the chair, acting as a conductor, that she shivered. The 
Auxiliary on the stretcher moaned. Dina got up and 
smoothed his blanket. Her teeth were chattering. 

44 It is cold,” she said. 44 I must lie down.” 

44 All right,” said Joseph. 44 I will go.” He started 
wearily to scramble to his feet. 

44 But you needn’t,” said Dina. She slid down to the 
floor and touched his face with her lips. 44 Will you let me 
sleep with my head on your arm ? ” she asked, lying down 
at a little distance from him and pulling the blanket over 
both of them. 44 But please don’t do anything.” 

44 No,” he said, lying stiff and frozen with the soft warm 
weight on his arm. 44 Sleep, Dina, you are safe ; we are 
both safe here.” 

She breathed quietly against his head. After a while 
she asked : 

44 Was it very bad — the shooting ? ” 

44 No,” he said. 44 It was all bluff and bluster, like every- 
thing these Arabs do.” 

F 



74 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

After another while she said timidly : 

“ Is it very beastly of me to lie on your arm and ask you 
to keep still ? ” 

He did not answer at once. Then he swallowed and 
said huskily : 

“ Anything you like, darling. Darling, anything you 
like” 


12 

He could not go to sleep again. Instead his thoughts 
travelled once more back the worn path to the Incident. He 
wished he could bring himself to tell Dina about it, but 
shame and the fear of ridicule always held him back. It was 
such a squalid and grotesque story that he could not expect 
even her to understand its influence on his life. 

He had been eleven when his father died. His father had 
been a Russian- Jewish pianist of some renown. His mother 
was English and a gentile. Her people had never approved 
of her marriage. After her husband’s death she went back 
to live with them in their house in Oxfordshire. Joseph was 
an only child ; he grew up in the large country house, played 
cricket and tennis, went to church, rode a pony and later 
a horse. His father was rarely mentioned and Joseph at 
eleven accepted this as one of the many paragraphs in the 
sacred code of “ don’ts 

In due course he was sent up to Oxford, and during the 
summer vacation after his second term fell in love with a 
woman from the neighbourhood whom he met at a local 
tennis tournament. Lily was five years older than Joseph, 
blonde, slim, pretty and divorced. She was generally liked 
among the neighbours, and sometimes teased by them on 
account of her enthusiasm for a new political movement 
which organised demonstrations through the London East 
End, and whose members wore black shirts and had fights 
with policemen. But Joseph at that time was not interested 
in politics. 



THE FIRST DAY 


75 

After his third term Joseph proposed to Lily and was 
told not to be an ass. After his fourth term they went to 
a hunt ball where they drank several cocktails and a good 
deal of champagne. During the last dance he caught a 
peculiar smile in her eye ; while the band played God save 
the King she asked him in a whisper where his room was, 
and told him how to find hers. 

He had known Lily for almost two years, was humbly 
in love with her, had talked to her poetry, sex and eternity, 
and had never kissed her lips. After the ball, without 
transition, he became the lover for a wildly unreal and 
elusive hour, of a woman so completely transformed that 
he kept stammering her name aloud to convince himself of 
her identity. Then came the awakening and the crash. 
Even now, years later, he grew hot with humiliation as he 
thought of it. In her dark room she had switched the bed- 
side lamp on to look for a cigarette. The sudden light had 
revealed their nudity, and with it the sign of the Covenant 
on his body, the stigma of the race incised into his flesh. 
The horror in her face made him at first think that she had 
discovered in him the symptoms of some repulsive disease ; 
then, in a voice icy with contempt she had accused him of 
infamy and deception, cross-examined him about bis 
ancestry, ordered him to get dressed and clear out of her 
room. At last the reason dawned on him. 

It was indeed a squalid little incident, impossible to tell 
Dina or anybody else. Even less could he explain to them 
that it had changed the course of his life. Not because 
of Lily — that aspect of it he got over after a while. Lily 
had merely been an instrument, and perhaps without her 
some other incident would have produced the same result. 
The result was a kind of shell-shock. Everything was 
changed. He began making inquiries about his father. He 
made a cult of his memory, to atone for his own cowardly 
part in the conspiracy of silence about him. This led to a 
breach with his mother’s family. He took rooms in London 
and frequented the people whom he was henceforth to regard 
as his own. At first he did not like them, but he read the 



76 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

newspapers and learned that Incidents were the rule in their 
lives. He read books and learned that it had been the same 
in the past. He read more books and learned about the 
movement of the Return and its founder, the Viennese 
journalist Dr. Herzl, whose story reminded him of his 
own. He too had thought that the stigma was buried in the 
past, until he had met with his Incident : the trial of Captain 
Dreyfus which he had been sent out to report. Towards 
the end of his life he had summed up his philosophy to a 
friend : 

“ If you are faced with a fence and can’t creep through 
under it, your only choice is to jump. For twenty centuries 
we have tried to creep through under the fence. They 
wouldn’t let us. Now we are taking the jump.” 

Once Joseph had taken the jump the rest became easy. 
He forgot about Lily and the shell-shock. He no longer ran 
away from something, but ran forward towards an aim. It 
had the lure of an exotic country, the fascination of a romantic 
revival and the appeal of a social utopia, all in one — almost 
too good to be true. It had been a curious journey — from 
Lily’s bed to Ezra’s Tower in Galilee. Whether it was a 
pilgrim’s progress or a wild-goose chase he did not know ; 
and at the moment he did not care to know. 

He felt the soft weight of Dina’s face on his arm, and the 
quiet rhythm of her breathing carried him off to sleep. 


13 

They woke at daybreak both at the same time. Neither of 
them had changed position or moved in their sleep. Both 
of them were fully awake at once. 

4 4 Come,” said Dina. 44 Let us see the sun rise.” 

They walked out of the tent into the light grey morning 
mist and the fresh dewy smell of the air. To the east, 
behind the hill with the sleeping Arab village, the sky was 
pink and yellow, rapidly changing colour. Dina threw her 



THE FIRST DAY 77 

hair back and shook herself like a puppy getting out of 
the water. 

“ I talked a lot of nonsense last night,” she said. 

“ Did you ? I slept,” said Joseph. “ Look at the 
sheep.” 

A flock of tiny light woolly specks were zigzagging down 
the slope beyond the wadi. 

“ We shall have a bigger flock,” said Dina. “ And cows. 
What shall we call the first calf ? ” 

“ Dr. Karl Marx,” said Joseph. “ Let’s climb on top of 
the tower.” 

They climbed up the wooden ladder, Dina first. Her 
legs were over his head and he saw the muscles play in her 
calves and had to restrain himself not to bite into the smooth, 
brown skin. Well, he thought, that will never be ; but there 
are other things. To approve and be approved of, to like 
and be liked. . . . 

They stood on the platform of Ezra’s Tower, surrounded 
by the gently undulating silver-grey hills of Galilee. They 
saw Dasha emerge from the living-hut, a towel round her 
neck and a big sponge in her hand, on her way to the showers. 

“ To-day we shall start building the cowshed,” said Dina. 

The sparkling tip of the sun had pierced the yellow mist. 
It was 5.30 a.m. ; and the evening and the morning were 
the first day. 




MORE DAYS 
(1938) 




MORE DAYS (1938) 


1 

Extract from the Constitution of Communal Settlements, in 
Compliance with the Standard Rules under the Co- 
operative Societies Ordinance, Government of Palestine, 
1933 : 

SECTION A : NAME , ADDRESS , OBJECT , 
POWERS AND AFFILIATIONS 

The general objects of the Society are to organise and pro - 
mote the economic and social interests of its members in accord- 
ance with co-operative principles and in particular to — 

(<2) Manage and develop a collective farm ; 

(d) Dispose of products of the settlement and purchase its 
requirements ; 

(e) Maintain a common purse into which all the earnings of 
their members shall be paid and from which all their re- 
quirements shall be provided ; 

(/) To assist members in raising their economic , cultural and 
social level by mutual aid , to care for their sick , to support 
the old and feeble . . . and to maintain and educate the 
children of the members ; 

(h) To supply all the social , cultural and economic require- 
ments in the settlement and to undertake all steps which 
may be deemed necessary for improving these conditions y 
and in particular to establish and maintain creches y 
kindergartens and schools for the education and bringing- 
up of the children ; 

(i) To establish and maintain in the settlement public institu- 
tions and services and generally undertake all activities 
which are customarily undertaken by village authorities . 

81 



82 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

SECTION D: SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING 
TO THE BUSINESS OF THE SOCIETY 
(3) Right 5 and Duties of Members : 

(a) The members have equal rights to receive from the 
common purse of the Society food, drink , clothing , housing 
and other necessities and amenities of life. 

SECTION C: FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
(1) Capital : 

The Society has no capital . 


2 


Pages from the chronicle of Joseph, a member of the Commune 
of Ezrds Tower 

Friday, October ... 1938 

To-day it is a year since young Naphtali was shot through 
his eye and brains because he couldn’t keep his head down. 
He has since become a hero and our local patron saint. 
Particularly as the poor, squinting little fool did not believe 
in violence and had so much set his heart on educating our 
Neighbours. However, heroes should be looked at through 
the telescope, not through the microscope. 

History is a series of futilities with grandeur as their 
cumulative effect. That, I suppose, is another example of 
the dialectical change of quantity into quality. . . . 

Anyway we have waxed and expanded during this first 
year and are beginning to look more or less like a village — 
or rather a cross between a fortified camp and a life-size 
model from a town-planner’s drawing-board. The Watch- 
tower is our parish church, the Dining Hut our club, town- 
hall and forum romanum, all in one. So far the living 
quarters are still of wood, but the first concrete buildings are 
completed and look most impressive — they are the cow- 
shed, dairy and the Children’s House. The latter has up 



MORE DAYS 


83 

to date five inmates who are quite fun. Two of them were 
born since we have settled and there are more on the way. 
The female comrades all seem to walk about with big bellies, 
terribly pleased with themselves for improving the national 
birth-rate and looking even less attractive than usual. I 
suppose they sing the Anthem during the act of procreation. 

We also have our graveyard with so far five concrete 
slabs. One died of typhus and three more were sent 
Naphtali’s way by our Neighbours : two during night 
attacks, the third ambushed while walking alone through the 
wadi and killed with particular beastliness — castrated, eyes 
out and all. And the people of Kfar Tabiyeh still have the 
cheek to come to our dispensary with their boils and belly- 
aches and fly-ridden children. 

The height of this tragi-comedy was the visit the 
Mukhtar paid us to-day to congratulate us on our first anni- 
versary. He came on a white stallion, accompanied by his 
eldest son, Issa. The son is a pock-marked, shifty-eyed lout, 
but the Mukhtar looked magnificent. Reuben showed them 
the library, tractor-shed, Children’s House, tree-nursery, 
etcetera ; the Mukhtar praised everything with clickings of 
the tongue and avuncular beams, while Issa looked like a 
fellow with jaundice in a delikatessen shop. 

Reuben asked them to stay on for the midday meal, and 
the Mukhtar started with gusto the ceremonial game of pro- 
test. He protested with both hands pushing an imaginary 
dish away into the air and clasping them to his chest as if to 
assert his innocence of any intention of robbing his hosts of 
so delicious a dish ; and after this had been repeated three 
times we went into the Dining Hall. He looked quaintly 
out of place at the communal table with his checked 
head-cloth floating round his shoulders and his enormous 
behind bulging over the narrow form ; while his cunning 
eyes scanned with curiosity the informal coining and going 
of the comrades, particularly the girls. I thought the meal 
appallingly poor after so much ado and felt rather ashamed 
of it, though I knew that Reuben was right not to make 
any fuss about the Mukhtar and, by making him eat accord- 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


84 

ing to our custom and not theirs, to show him that we are 
here in our own right. The Mukhtar felt it too and didn’t 
like it, though he kept up his jovial tone, while Issa sulkily 
munched his food without saying a word, and cast his furtive 
eyes down whenever a bare-thighed girl brushed past him 
in her shorts. The four of us were left alone at our table, 
only Max and Sarah from our extreme Arab-liberating anti- 
imperialist wing kept casting loving glances at Mukhtar and 
son, itching to explain to them that Allah is opium for the 
people and that their women should use birth-control ; 
fortunately they can’t talk Arabic. 

When we got to the coffee which, as a concession, was 
made the native way, the Mukhtar let the cat out of the bag. 
He lowered his voice to confidential intimacy and asked 
whether we knew what boundary between the Arab and 
Jewish states the Partition Commission is going to propose. 
Reuben said truthfully that he knew nothing about it except 
that the report of the Commission is supposed to be pub- 
lished shortly ; besides, in his opinion the whole idea of 
partition is going to be dropped. The Mukhtar then started 
nudging both of us with his elbows, with tremendous laughs 
and slappings of knees, pretending that we knew everything 
and were trying to hold back the secret from him. Finally 
he came out with it himself : according to rumour, the 
boundary is to cut Galilee into halves, with the village of 
Kfar Tabiyeh falling into the Jewish State. . . . 

Reuben merely shrugged and repeated that in his opinion 
the partition scheme is going to be abandoned. I asked 
the Mukhtar where he got his information from ; he put 
on a secretive air and said he got it from a very high and 
important personality. Probably it was the travelling cloth- 
merchant whom we saw the day before yesterday ride into 
Kfar Tabiyeh on his donkey ; but the Mukhtar seemed 
firmly convinced that it’s true. Reuben was bored, but I 
enjoyed the situation. I asked the Mukhtar whether he did 
not think that they would be much better off in the Hebrew 
State, reciting to him the whole stock-in-trade of arguments : 
how the Arab living-standard has risen and the death-rate 



MORE DAYS 


85 

fallen since our coming ; how the country was nothing but 
swamps and desert twenty years ago, while to-day the Arabs 
of Palestine are envied for their prosperity by all those in 
the neighbouring states. Hamdulillah, the Mukhtar said 
solemnly, thank God. I told him that we were paying all 
the taxes out of which the Government built the roads and 
Arab schools ; Hamdulillah, he said, nodding his head. I 
told him that the Arab labourer in this country earned about 
five times more than in Egypt and ten times more than in 
Iraq thanks to the capital we have brought in, and that Arab 
infant mortality had dropped to less than one-third thanks to 
our hospitals ; Hamdulillah, he said with emphatic vigour. 
I told him that the great Feisal himself, son of the Kalif 
Hussein and King of Iraq, had after the last war officially 
welcomed the rebuilding of the Hebrew State and that after 
all the Kalif’s son knew better what was good for the Arabs 
than the assassins hired by the godless Germans ; “ Aywa,” 
said the Mukhtar, “ God, how true you speak ! I have 
always held the same opinions but there are fools who will 
not listen to wisdom and even send a bullet into its seat.” 
He fell again into a conspiratorial whisper and revealed to 
us that he had always been a follower of the moderate 
Nashashibi clan, but since the extremist Husseinis were 
backed by the English and had got the upper hand ; and 
since their leader, the Grand Mufti Hadj Amin, was directing 
the terrorists from Damascus ; and since most of the 
moderate Nashashibi leaders had been bumped off by the 
Husseinis for wanting to come to terms with the Jews ; and 
since the other Mukhtar of Kfar Tabiyeh was a Husseini- 
man and had a blood-feud with our Mukhtar ; — and so 
on. In short, it was clearer than daylight that we never had 
a better and truer friend than the Mukhtar of Kfar Tabiyeh, 
and that the least we could do to repay our debt to him was 
to give him, once the Hebrew State was established, a nice, 
remunerative function like Collector of Taxes or Inspector 
of Road Transport ; and of course to hang the other Mukhtar 
with his whole family. . . . 

At last he was off, with protestations of eternal friendship 



86 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

and good-neighbourhood. Though his charm was wasted 
on Reuben, I couldn’t help liking the old brigand. How 
convincing he was even when he lied, and how unconvincing 
our Glicksteins are even when they speak the truth ! That’s 
one of the reasons why the English like them and loathe us. 
We keep on demonstrating our loyalty to them, and the 
Arabs keep on double-crossing them. But the point is that 
the English don’t for a minute expect the Arabs not to double- 
cross them ; it’s part of the game. They have an old and 
subtle tradition of dealing with Natives ; they are attracted 
and amused by them, they exploit them as a matter of course 
and expect to be stabbed by them as soon as they turn their 
back, as an equal matter of course. Whereas with us they 
don’t know where they are. They regard us not as Natives 
but as Foreigners, and that is quite a different matter. There 
is no superiority complex without an inferiority complex ; 
and while the native appeals mainly to the first, the foreigner 
appeals mainly to the second. Our protestations of loyalty 
make us only the more suspect. 

Sunday 

Thank God, Moshe our Treasurer is coming back from 
Hospital, so after the General Meeting next week I shall be 
relieved from deputising for him and go back to my own 
work. But first I have to prepare the annual Balance Sheet 
for the meeting, which is a rather unpleasant job. Though 
it is understood that for the first three years we shall work 
with a deficit, and shall only start paying ground rent and 
repaying our investment loans to the National Fund after the 
fifth year, it is nevertheless depressing to have to produce a 
balance-sheet which starts : 


Income 

Produce 
Olive groves 
Other fruit trees 
Woodland 
Tree nurseries 
Goats and sheep 


Pal . Pounds 
0:0:0 
0:0:0 
0:0:0 
0:0:0 
0:0:0 



MORE DAYS 


87 

So far our only sources of income were the first crops 
of about three acres of wheat and barley, milk and butter 
from our dairy, a few pounds from the chicken farm and 
vegetable garden, the cash earnings of six of our members 
who work as day-labourers in the Haifa cement factory, and, 
under the item “ Miscellaneous ” the sale of a gold watch 
which Max’s aunt in New York sent him as a birthday 
present. 

However, communal bookkeeping has its fascinating side. 
The basic unit of our arithmetic is not the pound but the 
“ Work Day ” and the “ Maintenance Day ”. A Work Day 
is the amount of work done by one member in one eight- 
hour day. The value of the Work Day varies according to 
production branch. It is calculated by dividing our total 
annual income from e.g . milk and butter by the number of 
Work Days expended in dairy and cowshed. This is what 
the cow boys and dairy workers theoretically earn per day ; 
but of course they are not paid, the money remains in the 
communal purse. The fewer the Work Days spent on each 
pound’s worth of produce, the more profitable is that branch 
of production and (taking amortisation and depreciation into 
account) we thus obtain a check on rentability. As in all 
new settlements the average value of our Work Day is still 
very low : three shillings and sixpence is what we theoreti- 
cally earn per head per day. 

But this of course applies only to the “ earners ”, i.e. to 
those who are engaged in income-producing work. The 
work of the cooks, orderlies, seamstresses, laundresses, etc., 
produces no income. A little under half of the members of 
the Commune is employed on such non-productive house- 
hold work. Thus the income from a Work Day should be 
at least twice the expenditure per Maintenance Day (that is 
the cost of feeding, clothing, and social services per head 
and day). Alas, it is not. The cost of a Maintenance Day 
is still two shillings and ninepence. 

What really fascinates me is the quaint statistical picture 
of how the average civilised human being in a rationally 
organised society spends his or her time to satisfy the basic 



88 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

human needs. There are now 36 adults in Ezra’s Tower 
(37 founding members minus 5 dead plus 4 new proba- 
tioners). There are 365 days in the year, so the theoretical 
total of working days is 36x365 = 13,140. Of these, 6,624 
Work Days were spent on income-earning labour (that is in 
the fields, orchards, olive groves, dairy, poultry farm, vege- 
table garden, tending the sheep, and maintenance work). If 
we divide this total by the number of members we find that 
the average member spent 196 days in the year to earn his 
keep. By the same method we find that he (or she — the 
statistical average is always a hermaphrodite) spent 28*5 days 
on cooking, washing up and serving meals ; 12*6 days on 
dress-making and repairing ; 3 days on shoemaking, 3*5 on 
laundering, 3-5 on cleaning his/her living quarters, 4 on 
tending the lawn and other embellishments of the Com- 
mune, 6*5 on travelling, 1*5 on looking after the Library and 
Stores, 3 on dispensing medical care, 21 on running the 
Children’s House, 20 on being ill, 5*6 in childbed and suck- 
ling, 4 on leave, 56 on Shabbaths and Holydays and 2*2 on 
doing nothing because of heavy rains. 

Now according to this time-table about one-eighteenth of 
the total working days of the Commune are spent in running 
the Children’s House — in other words two people are 
employed full time to look after our five children — quite 
apart from the time which the parents spend with the 
children in their leisure hours. Whence follows that the 
children are much better looked after in the Commune than 
in the family. The wife of an individual farmer with five 
children not only looks after them alone, but has also to 
cook, do the housework, and at times to help in the fields 
and with the cattle. Her time-table would show about 700 
Work Days in the year to do all these jobs — and less well 
than in our case. She can only manage it by squeezing two 
eight-hour days into each day of her life ; and the same 
goes for the man. 

The revolutionary thing about the Commune is that it 
makes farming possible on an eight-hour basis and turns it 
into a civilised occupation. From 5 p.m. onward my time is 



MORE DAYS 89 

my own. And when all is said, what is the final aim of 
socialism if not the conquest of leisure ? 

Saturday 

Yesterday at the weekly stores distribution I played 
Father Christmas for the last time before Moshe’s return. 
“ Shopping hour ” on Shabbath eve is one of the highlights 
of the week, and to be salesman in a free-for-all shop one of 
the most gratifying occupations. The queuing-up in front 
of the stores is a kind of social occasion ; everybody comes 
fresh from the showers, in clean linen and Shabbath-gear, 
looking his or her best, cheered by the prospect of to-night's 
meat dinner and to-morrow’s long sleep and rest. Then 
they file with their shopping-lists into my decrepit shack with 
an air of looking for a fur coat in Bond Street. The standard 
allowance is fifteen cigarettes, one cake of soap and one 
razor-blade a week, one tube of toothpaste and boot polish 
a fortnight, one toothbrush a month ; furthermore note- 
paper, envelopes, stamps, bootlaces, contraceptives, electric 
bulbs, torch-batteries, combs, hairclips and so on, by special 
order according to need. All of us get one complete issue of 
working clothes and one Shabbath-outfit each year. The 
working clothes are bought from wholesalers ready-made, 
the Saturday clothes for the women are made in our own 
workshop according to taste, so as to provide variety. It is 
surprising how few basic needs people have once competition 
and hoarding are abolished. 

In a couple of years we shall have our own furniture 
workshop and start going in for luxuries. For the time 
being our luxury-budget for the whole Commune is twelve 
pounds a year — the equivalent of two Work Days per head 
per year. . . . 

Moshe has a trick of handing out the goods with some 
terrific sales-talk in a mixture of three languages, giving each 
item a fantastic imaginary price and carrying on a bitter 
mock-haggling with the customers. It is a performance one 
never gets tired of. Perhaps because it tickles our conceit, 
our feelings of superiority towards the capitalist world ; — 

Cr 



90 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

or because it comforts us by deriding the fleshpots of Egypt 
which we have left so irretrievably behind, and enhances the 
virtue of our appalling poverty ? 

For, when all is said, ours is a hard and drab existence, 
and one has to do a lot of sales-talk to oneself to stick it. 
Even so there are days . . . 

However, they are only days. Remember Joseph, re- 
member. Hast thou forgotten Pharaoh’s hosts ? 

Powder and cosmetics are banned from our stores as attri- 
butes of “ bourgeois decay ”, I wish they weren’t. I wish 
we were now and then visited by some charitable scarlet 
woman of Babylon. 

Sunday 

Yesterday being Shabbath a bunch of us went down in 
the truck to Gan Tamar to listen to a concert by the Phil- 
harmonic Orchestra which is touring the settlements. 
Although Gan Tamar played the role of godfather to us, 
relations have been steadily deteriorating since we became 
solidly established on our own. There were the usual minor 
frictions about a truck they once borrowed and returned 
with a broken spring, and so on, but the root of the trouble 
is of course political. I wonder whether any other race has 
the same capacity for doctrinaire fanaticism as ours. It has, 
I suppose, to do with the Exile ; emigres always have cliques 
and quarrels, and we have been emigres for two thousand 
years. The exiled have nothing to hang on to except 
doctrines and convictions ; hence they fight over ideas like 
dogs over bones. The others call it politely our Semitic 
intensity. 

Anyhow, at the last municipal elections in Tel Aviv they 
had thirty-two competing party lists, and each party was 
convinced of being the only true prophets of the kingdom 
of heaven. 

But the real fun only starts when the Hebrew prophetic 
streak cross-breeds with socialist sectarianism. Then dots on 
i * s and crosses on fs become a matter of life and death and 
deviations from the party line are castigated with all the 



MORE DAYS 


91 

wrath of Amos and Isaiah. This is what turned Marx into 
such a quarrelsome old bully ; and we the disciples have 
inherited, if not his grandeur, at least his cantankerousness. 
Thus even our rural Communes, though they are all built 
on the same principle, are split up between three rival 
Federations. Ezra’s Tower is affiliated to the “United 
Group of Communes ” which supports the Hebrew Labour 
Party ; whereas Gan Tamar belongs to “ Hashomer Hazair ” 
(“ The Young Guardian ”) which stands on the extreme left 
of our Labour movement and corresponds to the British 
I.L.P. They have strong sympathies for Russia, whereas 
we are rather critical of the Soviet system. So after the 
concert there was the usual argument in the Reading Room 
of Gan Tamar — passionate, venomous and futile, as is 
proper and befitting in the socialist fraternity. 

It started as usual with Russia — the one-party system, 
the inequality of pay, the Purges, the let-down of Spain, etc. 
The Gan Tamar crowd had a ready excuse for everything, 
and our radicals Max and Sarah supported them. It is de- 
pressing to watch how these two gradually drift into a 
position where political grudges and personal discord fuse 
into one. Sarah feels frustrated, among other things be- 
cause she believes that she should be in charge of the 
Children’s House instead of Dina. Sarah is an Adlerian 
juvenile-individual-psychologist cum vegetarian-dietarian ; 
she has a pale, pinched little face with large starved-virgin 
eyes. Max, who has an enormous, sniffing tapir-nose and an 
unkempt I.L.P.-mane, feels that he should be a member of 
the Secretariat — which indeed he should according to his 
brains, but being quarrelsome and unpopular he ends up in 
all elections as an also-ran — a member of the Committee 
for Culture or such like. Both are unmarried. 

So the argument on Russia took its usual course, rather 
like a game of chess where at the opening stages both 
partners know the other’s answer in advance, and once it 
gets really going throw the chessmen at each other’s head. 
This time the throwing was started by Moshe, our Treasurer. 
We had already got through the opening, to wit : 



92 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

White (Queen's pawn 4) : Obvious untruth of the accusations 
against the Trotskyite opposition. 

Black (Queen’s pawn 4) : All opposition in a Workers' State is 
a priori counter-revolutionary. 

White (Queen’s Bishop pawn 4) : Growing inequality of pay and 
privileges for the Bureaucracy. 

Black (King’s Bishop pawn 3) : Necessity to stimulate produc- 
tion by temporary expedients. 

White (King’s Knight Bp. 3) ; Chauvinistic education, boosting 
of leadership, religious revival, etc. 

Black (Queen’s Knight Bp. 3) : Necessity of preparing backward 
masses for imperialist war and fascist aggression. 

White (Dasha, pawn takes pawn) : “ They even encourage 

bourgeois decadence like lipstick, rouge and powder.” 
Black (Sarah, retakes pawn, blushes with rage) : “ The dialectics 
of proletarian sex-appeal as opposed to the prostitution 
of bourgeois matrimony ...” 

It was at this stage that Moshe lost patience and upset the 
game. Moshe is a heavy-weight, in every respect. He is 
short and stocky like a bull ; he sits on our Communal 
purse like the Lord Chancellor on the Woolsack ; he is a 
financial genius capable, like the other Moses, of drawing 
water from rock ; and he has a way, with his slow speech 
and heavy common sense, of trampling through the thick of 
an argument like an elephant through the jungle. So Moshe 
told the Gan Tamar crowd that if they wanted to imitate 
Russia they would first of all have to abolish the Common 
Purse as a left deviation and start paying out salaries, it being 
understood that members of the Secretariat would be entitled 
to draw about three hundred times the amount paid to the 
average worker and to keep a secret police authorised to 
deport or shoot anybody without trial. As the next step they 
would have to build a separate dining-hut for the skilled 
Stakhanovites, and a third one for the comrades of the 
Secretariat ; they would have to abolish co-education, intro- 
duce school-fees and so on. . . . 

There was a terrific uproar. When it had subsided, 
Felix’s sharp academic voice made itself heard. Felix is an 



MORE DAYS 93 

expert in timing ; he can wait patiently behind his compli- 
cated lenses for the psychological moment, the short lull 
when everybody is off his guard ; and before the others have 
recovered, he is in the middle of a lecture. Felix is the 
pocket-Lenin of Gan Tamar and one of the leading theoreti- 
cians of the Hebrew I.L.P. Among other things he is the 
inventor of the system, practised in some of the Hashomer 
Hazair settlements, according to which up to the age of 
eighteen boys and girls take their shower-baths together but 
are bound by vows of chastity. For all that he looks like a 
male spinster practising the solitary vice every other Shab- 
bath according to plan, with an extra go on the anniversary 
of the October Revolution. So now Felix set out to analyse, 
dissect, split, twist, turn and re-turn Moshe ’s arguments, and 
everybody, friend and foe, sat back to let the inevitable take 
its course. Felix’s lectures have a quality of making one 
realise how hard the chair is on which one sits. He spoke 
for a quarter of an hour in complicated abstractions ; the 
upshot of it all was that the Russian kolkhoz should not be 
compared with our Communes, because in Russia Socialism 
had to be imposed upon a backward population whereas our 
Communes were built by a picked elite of volunteers. 

“ All right, we know all this,” puffed Moshe. “ But if we 
are allowed to experiment in pure rural communism on terri- 
tory ruled by capitalistic Britain, v/hy could not a similar 
elite of Russian volunteers carry out similar experiments on 
Soviet Russian territory ? ” 

Because, Felix explained, quoting various speeches by 
Stalin, conditions in Russia were different from conditions 
everywhere else, and methods employed by the proletarian 
state could not be compared to the methods of capitalistic 
states, and vice versa. Felix was fighting a battle of attrition, 
but one cannot wear down an elephant. 

“ You are all maniacs,” puffed Moshe. “ Our Communes 
are the only place in the world where individual property is 
completely vested in the community, where all men are really 
equal, and where you can live and die without ever having 
touched money. In these hundred-odd settlements of ours 



94 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

we have now been practising pure rural communism for over 
thirty years, have survived all trials without sacrificing a 
single basic principle, and have transformed a seemingly 
utopian idea into a small-scale but significant working con- 
cern. Now I ask you : why do the Russians not send 
delegations and experts to study experimental communism 
on the only spot on the earth where it is really practised ? 
They send commissions to study American factories, English 
football and German police methods. Would you not expect 
them to be equally interested in the economic and social 
phenomena which applied rural communism produces ? 
Rut they haven’t sent a commission yet, not even a single 
journalist ; every reference to us is banned in their Press, 
the Hebrew language is illegal in Russia and our comrades 
are shot. I see no reason why we should get excited about 
Russia, and every reason why they should get excited 
about us.” 

“ Typical chauvinistic conceit,” sniffed Max. The Gan 
Tamar crowd seconded. The curious thing is that their 
papers keep on boosting the “ shining socialistic example of 
the Hebrew Communes ” until one gets sick of it and begins 
to doubt whether we really exist or are merely an invention 
of our own propaganda ; but when they talk about Russia 
they suddenly get self-deprecating and humble as if in 
church. 

Felix had withdrawn into silence, and the discussion 
petered out in the usual stalemate. We all went into the 
kitchen and Ruth made us coffee. The cosiest place in all 
our settlements is the deserted kitchen around midnight, 
when the others are asleep and one starts cooking coffee and 
pinching biscuits from the larder with a feeling of being on 
a spree. It is called a “ cumsitz ” — a corruption of the 
German “ come and sit down During the cumsitz we all 
became quite jolly again. There were the usual bits of gossip 
about the other Communes : the snobs of Commune Khefziba 
(where practically each member has an academic degree) have 
started building a swimming-pool although they had a deficit 
last year. In Kfar Gileadi, one of the oldest Communes in 



MORE DAYS 


95 

Upper Galilee, the younger generation captured the Secret- 
ariat at the last election and the patriarchs of Old Wabash’s 
time are all very bitter about it. In Tirat Z’wi, a new 
Commune in the Jordan Valley run by the Orthodox party, 
they had a terrible quarrel about milking the cows on the 
Shabbath ; they submitted the question to the Chief Rab- 
binate which ruled that the cows should be milked but that 
vinegar should be put into the pails to prevent Shabbath- 
milk being used for commercial purposes. 

It was all very jolly — and would have been even jollier 
with a bottle of brandy or Scotch. I wonder when we shall 
get over this puritanism in our Communes. Sometimes I 
feel that I must get drunk or I can’t stand our virtues any 
longer. But the new generation doesn’t seem to miss any- 
thing ; these Sabra-boys regard a glass of wine as something 
like opium or hashish, and the girls look upon lipstick as an 
invention of the devil, who dwells in the Babel of Tel Aviv 
and wears a dinner jacket with a white carnation. 

Thursday 

Mendl the Pied Piper is back from Jerusalem, and he’s got 
the cello. I saw the cello advertised for sale by its refugee 
owner in the Jerusalem Mail a week ago. It was only five 
pounds — dirt cheap ; and luckily Moshe wasn’t yet back* 
So in my capacity as Temporary Treasurer I decided to buy 
it for us — from next year’s luxury budget, as this year’s 
twelve pounds are already exhausted. I should of course 
have consulted at least the other members of the Secretariat, 
but I didn’t. When Moshe heard about it he was puffing with 
fury and promised that the Annual Meeting would come 
down on me like a ton of bricks. I certainly let myself in for 
something — but what matters is that we now have our 
string quartet complete. 

I asked Mendl whether he had picked up any political 
gossip in Jerusalem, about Partition and so on, but he hadn’t. 
He is completely unpolitical — self-contained, silent and 
rather dreamy. He is our tractor-driver and mechanic and 
loves tinkering so much that I am sure he is secretly happy 



96 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

whenever something goes wrong with our electricity plant. 
His shyness prevented him from showing his excitement 
about the cello. He is always shy and restrained about music 
— until he gets going and becomes transformed into the Pied 
Piper. Each passion has its own chastity. 

Monday 

One of our periodic financial crises, which even Moshe’s 
genius is unable to prevent. For the last three days we 
have been feeding on bread, olives, noodles and milk. 
Dasha says the vitamin balance is all right but we walk about 
with a hungry look, and whenever I meet anybody’s eyes, 
I see in them a cello crossed by a dagger. We haven’t had 
meat for a fortnight and Arie refuses to sacrifice any of his 
sheep ; it isn’t the season — it apparently never is. We have 
sold our late vegetable crop and all our cheese and butter, 
and there we are, high and dry. We have seven working 
people on the sick-list — three with malaria, two with 
typhoid and two with dysentery — which in itself is only 
slightly higher than the norm, but unfortunately four out 
of our five cash-earners are among them. Usually they 
bring home about ten to fifteen pounds each Friday from 
the cement factory (not to mention the tools, soap and sundry 
items which they pinch from the factory for the common 
good). This sum is the mainstay of our weekly cash-budget 
— the rest of the turnover consists in a series of complicated 
credit operations with the Workers’ Bank and the National 
Cooperatives who buy our produce and supply most of our 
needs ; but a minimum amount of cash is needed to keep 
the concern going. 

Fortunately our great friend the Mukhtar of Kfar Tabiyeh 
turned up this morning, and after the usual nerve-racking 
big-talk about God’s blessings and the Universe in general, 
came out with the proposal to hire our tractor for the 
ploughing-up of his falha fields. I ran to fetch Moshe, and 
he and Reuben haggled with the Mukhtar for an hour and a 
half, plying him with the last of our coffee and sugar, and 
finally agreed to do the ploughing for ninety piaster per 



MORE DAYS 


97 

dunum. Moshe and the Mukhtar both swore that they were 
ruining themselves and that they were only doing it out of 
pure love for the other, and both were highly satisfied ; the 
Mukhtar because he had already tried to hire the tractor of 
our dear neighbours of Gan Tamar who had asked ten 
piastres more per dunum ; and Moshe, because he has found 
a heaven-sent fifteen to twenty pounds ready cash. (Mendl 
who is going to work the tractor is to collect the cash after 
each couple of dunums ploughed.) 

Anyway, Moshe promised that the crisis will be over by 
Friday and that on Shabbath we shall have a solid meal 
including sugared coffee ; also an extra issue of pipe tobacco 
on shopping day. But these rosy prospects did not save me 
from having to go down to Gan Tamar to borrow some 
urgently needed items, including petrol for the tractor and 
two sheets of sole-leather for my shoe-shop. To borrow 
from Gan Tamar is never a pleasant job — they are eight 
years old and we only one ; they are rich and we are poor ; 
they have three hundred souls and we forty-one ; they are 
patronising and we are arrogant. Besides, we all have a bad 
conscience for under-cutting them in this tractor business, 
and on top of it all I had to borrow not only the goods but 
also a truck of theirs to bring them up, as we have run out 
of the last drop of petrol. 

So I took the donkey, and as I trotted down the wadi I 
felt like riding to Canossa. This kind of unpleasant mission 
always seems to fall to my lot ; for instance if Moshe has to 
land a shady credit transaction with the Workers’ Bank in 
Haifa, Reuben usually sends me along to give Moshe moral 
support by using what he calls “ the exotic charm of my 
gentile streak ”. It is Reuben’s favourite joke — he hasn’t 
many. 

Au fond of course I enjoy this kind of crook-mission ; 
besides, I had to atone for the cello. It is always a change 
to get away from the old place, and I trotted along the wadi 
serenely whistling to myself. It was a glorious day, not too 
hot ; last night we had our first rain and everything around, 
including the sky, looked freshly polished and glistening as 



98 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

after a spring-cleaning. I also like riding a donkey. I like 
the solid, dusty touch of its hide with its sun-heated dry 
stiff hair. Sitting on its back one feels one is riding not an 
animal but a stuffed rocking-horse. I admire the donkey’s 
headstrong pride and self-sufficiency, its complete lack of 
horsy or doggy sloppiness. If the camel is the ship of the 
desert, the donkey is a rowing boat : the oars are one’s legs. 

I have seen Arabs on donkeys doing with their legs seventy- 
five strokes a minute. Our Garbo is a perfect specimen ; 
if one stops rowing her she comes to a standstill at once. 
For all her unsentimentality she has the gluey, long-lashed 
eyes of her namesake. 

In Gan Tamar I found another guest-donkey tied to the 
post in front of the Secretariat, but this one was a fat white 
and solemn animal which made our hide-bound Garbo look 
like Cinderella. On entering the Secretariat I learned that 
it belonged to old Rabbi Greenfeld who had come on his 
bi-annual visit, complete with khupah and other sacred para- 
phernalia to marry those willing to undergo the ceremony. 
Thanks to this circumstance I found Felix in one of his 
mellower moods (he had obviously not yet heard of our shady 
transaction with the Mukhtar). His awe-inspiring glasses 
lay in front of him on the table, and his suddenly defenceless 
eyes made me feel almost mean for swindling the leather and 
petrol out of him which God alone knows when they will 
get back. But after all, they are rich and we are poor (they 
have just bought polished hard-wood tables for their dining- 
hall with chairs instead of forms !). Felix granted, with a 
sourish smile, all my requests, and then suggested that we 
should go and see the “ monkey-business ” which was just 
being transacted in front of the dining-hall. On our way he 
apologetically referred to the fact that of course the couples 
only submitted to the “ monkey-business ” when a child was 
bom or on the way, as the handicap of illegitimate birth 
would be “ dialectically unfair ” to the offspring in this 
prejudice-ridden world. At the entrance to the dining-hut 
we found old Rabbi Greenfeld officiating in front of a couple 
who stood in their working clothes under the khupah , the 



MORE DAYS 


99 

ritual canopy. Its four poles were held up by four boys in 
khaki shorts and cartwheel hats of straw with ragged fringes. 
It looked like a scene from a comic opera and they were 
all frankly grinning. The old Rabbi did his best not to 
notice it, burying his nose in his prayer-book. As I looked 
closer, I saw that the bride was fat Peninah who has been 
happily married for years and has three children ; Samuel, 
her husband, stood next to me among the spectators, grin- 
ning. Seeing my surprise he whispered : 

“ Hallo, Joseph. The real bride is eight months gone and 
didn’t want to hurt old Greenfeld’s feelings, so my Peninah 
is deputising for her. She’s done it three times in the last 
two years. Old Greenfeld’s short-sighted and Peninah loves 
to get married.” 

With some difficulty the bridegroom got the ring half- 
way up Peninah’s fat finger, and the ceremony was over. 
The next couple was already waiting. Before they walked 
under the canopy Peninah and the bridegroom discreetly 
passed the wedding ring on to them ; they have only one in 
Gan Tamar which has to serve for all. 

I like old Greenfeld, so when it was all over I went up to 
shake hands with him. He looked at me over his gold- 
rimmed spectacles, trying to place me in his memory. I told 
him I was the cobbler from Ezra’s Tower, and he said : 

“ Oh yes, yes — the new ones. A hard life up there, a 
hard life. Nu , how are things ? ” 

I told him there were three couples who wanted to get 
married. He took out his grimy pocket-book, licked his 
thumb, turned the pages forward and back, and said that 
according to his schedule he was to visit us in about three 
weeks’ time. At that moment Felix came up to me to say 
that if I wanted to go the truck was ready for me. “ What, 
what ? ” said old Greenfeld, “ you are going in the auto- 
mobile, young man ? Then I will come with you at once, it 
will save me a journey on the donkey and it will rest my 
piles.” 

So we set out for home, I driving the truck and old 
Greenfeld sitting beside me with an air of bliss and reading 



100 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

his Bible in spite of the bumps, while the khupah and other 
paraphernalia were stowed with the petrol and my precious 
leather sheets. In my hurry — for Felix wanted the truck 
returned before the night — I had forgotten to borrow their 
wedding ring as we had done on previous occasions ; and on 
top of it I remembered that one of our prospective bride- 
grooms was in hospital with dysentery. That didn't matter 
much as we could find a deputy (the only thing that mattered 
was old Greenfeld's seal on the marriage licence) ; but the 
ring was rather embarrassing. So I coughed and told the 
Rabbi that as we had not counted on his visit so soon we 
had not yet bought the rings. Fie put the Bible down and 
looked at me over his glasses ; he has little red veins in his 
eyes and yellow nicotine-stains in his beard. “ I can sell you 
some rings," he said. He fumbled in the pocket of his black 
silk kaftan and produced three rings. He held them on the 
palm of his soft white hand as though on a jeweller's cushion. 
“ Pure eighteen carat gold," he said. “ I will sell them to 
you for a shilling each. After the ceremony I shall buy them 
back from the young couples for a shilling each. Nu , will 
you make business ? " 

“ This is very kind of you, Rabbi," I said. 

“ You must give me the three shillings, young man," 
he said. “ It must be transacted properly." 

“ But I haven't got them. You know that we never carry 
money — we don't own any, individually." 

“ Betakh ," he said. “ Of course. I always forget the 
ways of you lunatics." 

“ Moshe, our Treasurer, will pay you for the rings when 
we arrive," I said. 

“We shall see," he said doubtfully, putting the rings 
away in his pocket. “ But don't forget : no money no rings, 
no rings no wedding." He spoke in earnest, pushed his 
glasses down and reverted to his Bible. Old Greenfeld lives 
in a world petrified into symbols and make-believe ; but the 
rules of the make-believe have to be strictly adhered to. For 
the last twro thousand years the believers left their doors open 
on Passover-eve for Messiah to walk in, and laid a cover for 



MORE DAYS 


IOI 


him to partake of their meal, and assured each other that 
44 next year we shall celebrate in Jerusalem They also 
sold all their plates and cutlery which had been in touch 
with leaven to their gentile neighbours, and bought it back 
when the festival of the unleavened bread was over. It was 
all make-believe, but this stubborn ritual alone held them to- 
gether during the centuries of dispersion. There was cun- 
ning behind this naivety and shrewdness behind their 
mysticism ; — I wondered whether old Greenfeld was really 
so unaware of the farcicality of these marriage ceremonies 
as he pretended to be. 

As if he had followed the trend of my thought, he suddenly 
turned to me : 

44 You speak the Tongue very fluently,” he said. 

44 You know that we speak nothing else among ourselves,” 
I said. (Old Greenfeld ’s Hebrew is fluent too, but he speaks 
in the traditional sing-song voice of the prayer ; he sounds 
like a Catholic priest alighting from Wells’ Time Machine in 
the Roman Suburra on a market day, addressing the fish- 
wives in Church Latin.) 

44 But what is the good of the language if you do not read 
the Book ? ” he said. 44 Do you know for example what 
Rabbi Eliezer of Safet said with reference to Jochanan the 
Cobbler ? ” 

I confessed that I didn’t, while watching the bumps on 
the road, for we were just turning into the wadi. 

44 Oi,” cried old Greenfeld, shaken by a jolt and adjusting 
his fur-rimmed hat. 44 Drive slowly, what is the hurry ? 
We shall arrive in time, blessed be the Name. . . . Now 
about Rabbi Eliezer of Safet. Whenever his way led him 
past the shop of Jochanan the Cobbler, he used to go in and 
read to him the day’s chapter from the Book. Jochanan was 
highly pleased and honoured, though he couldn’t hear a word 
as it had pleased the Lord to create him stone-deaf. So 
some of his disciples asked Rabbi Eliezer about this matter. 
And Rabbi Eliezer said : 4 There is of course a difference 
whether he can hear or not, but it is a small difference. The 
sacrament of the Name acts upon the person even if he is 



102 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

unaware of it.’ . . .” He looked at me with his red-veined 
eyes from under the brim of his fur hat. 

44 Nu, does this story convey a meaning to you ? ” 

I smiled and nodded, keeping my eyes on the road. 

44 Then come and visit me when you come to Safet. I 
live in the house next to the Synagogue of the Ari. Have 
you been in Safet before ? ” 

44 No, but I always wanted to go.” 

44 Shame upon you,” said the Rabbi. 44 There he lives 
for I don’t know how many years in the Land and has not 
been to Safet. It is like living in an attic and having never 
been to the cellar.” 

In a way old Greenfeld is right. It is a shame never to 
have seen the cradle of Hebrew mysticism and poetry, the 
town of the mediaeval kabbalists and centre of Hebraism 
after the exodus from Spain. I promised old Greenfeld to 
visit him in Safet. 

4 4 From what country do you come ? ” 

44 From England.” 

44 England ? Very few come from England,” he said. 
44 What made you come ? ” 

I gave an evasive answer and he pushed his glasses up to 
look at me. 

44 Nu , come, come, tell me,” he said impatiently. 44 It is 
written : who can withhold himself from speaking ? ” 

And suddenly I was itching to tell old Greenfeld about 
the Incident. 44 I am waiting,” he said peremptorily. 

So I told him the whole thing, choosing my words as 
tactfully as I could. Old Greenfeld shook his head medi- 
tatively. 

44 Oi, the stories one hears from you young people,” he 
said. 44 You want to tell me that you left everything because 
of this stupid woman ? ” he asked with a sly twinkle in 
his eye. 

44 Oh, not because of her. But it was a kind of shock, 
you know. From that moment I saw everything in a 
different light.” 

44 1 understand, you must not talk so much,” old Green- 



MORE DAYS 


103 

feld cried excitedly. “ His tongue is like a ready pen but he 
understands nothing.” 

44 I don’t often tell this story, you know.” 

44 I know, I know. You are frightened that the other 
heathens will laugh at you, instead of praising the Name for 
Its cunning ways to teach a fool a lesson. And what is the 
lesson ? ” 

44 I don’t know.” 

44 Then let old Greenfeld tell you. Because you were a 
traitor in disguise, He showed you up in the nakedness of 
your flesh. . . 

He pushed his glasses down again and turned back to his 
Bible, with an air of having settled the matter definitely and 
to everybody’s satisfaction. 

The arrival home with truck, rabbi, petrol and khupahwas 
a triumph. Everything went smoothly. We bought the 
rings and married all three couples with Max deputising for 
the bridegroom with dysentery, and sold the rings back to 
old Greenfeld, and fed him on onions and noodles which he 
took quite nicely. Then I drove him to Gan Tamar and 
came back rowing Garbo. 

It was a highly enjoyable day. In the evening I took Ellen 
out into the fields. 

Wednesday 

The Annual Meeting is over and I was not even lynched. 
I was saved by the news that we are going to receive a new 
batch of 30-40 people next month, and that within a year 
or so we are going to be brought up to our full establishment 
of 200 adults. The new wave of persecution in Central 
Europe has led to a speeding-up of the programme; all 
Communes are to be brought in the quickest time to their 
maximum absorptive capacity, according to the amount of 
land they hold. 

This means that we are getting credits for urgent building 
and investments, and that the whole budget for the next 
year is changed. Most of the building programme is laid 
down according to the standard plans of the Fund, so that 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


104 

our opposition, led by Max and Sarah, had not much to 
argue about. Their opportunity came with the non-specific 
items of “ general improvements ” and 44 miscellaneous ” 
(the latter including the so-called luxury budget). Having 
said all there was to be said about the wretched cello (“Joseph 
fiddles while Rome burns ”), Max brought in a resolution 
according to which all not specifically allocated sums should 
be spent to the last penny on the Children’s House. This 
was the signal for starting one more of the interminable 
debates about the children which have been going on in all 
Communes for the last twenty years. Everybody agrees that 
the children are the most important 44 produce ” of the 
Communes and that their care and education should come 
before everything else. Accordingly the first stone or con- 
crete building in any Commune is the Children’s House ; 
the second is usually the cowshed. The children first ; 
then the cattle ; then the workers, is the fundamental prin- 
ciple, the iron hierarchy of priorities according to which all 
our settlements are built. Even in a new pariah-settlement 
like ours, with up to now only five children, the Children’s 
House is a little marvel of luxury, with tiled shower-baths 
and lavatories, and a separate kitchen, while the majority of 
the adult workers still live in wooden block-huts — icy in 
winter, baking hot in summer — and some even in tents. 
We bring up our children like princes, while their elders live 
like pigs. It is one of the unhealthy extremes to which 
Semitic intensity crossed with Left radicalism is so inclined. 
The new generation is becoming a fetish, the old one is 
mere 4 4 manure for the future ” as they used to put it in the 
early puritan days of the Russian Revolution. Result : the 
high illness-rate among the adults, and the frequency of 
physical and mental crack-ups. 

Another paradoxical result of communal upbringing is 
that, instead of eliminating, it increases the parents’ senti- 
mental addiction to their offspring which I always found one 
of the most tiresome attributes of our race. The children 
live in the House almost from birth, which means that they 
are brought up by trained nurses instead of untrained 



MORE DAYS 


105 

dilettanti (parenthood, the most responsible job in society, 
is the only one for which no licence is required). Our system 
has the further advantage of freeing both parents for work 
during the day, guaranteeing them uninterrupted sleep at 
night, and protecting the infant against old papa Oedipus 
and other plagues. I believe our children grow up in better 
physical and mental health than others, and the parents are 
even more devoted to them than in the normal family. As 
soon as they knock off work they rush to the Children’s 
House, and from five o’clock until dinner-time one sees in 
all settlements nothing but proud parents taking their little 
angels for a walk. Most people find this charming, I think 
it is a bore ; but then, I have always liked or disliked children 
according to their personality and not as a separate kind of 
species as most people seem to do. 

The discussion ended after midnight because of general 
exhaustion. A few, as usual, were asleep, others dozing. 
But we all would rather sleep through a whole meeting than 
be for a minute absent from it ; and rather lose a finger than 
the right to vote on the question of where the next chicken- 
house should be built. 

Thursday 

The night-job didn’t progress to-night ; the snoring of 
Max, with whom I share a room, suddenly began to irritate 
me. I gave it up. I went out of the hut and over to Ellen’s 
room. But Ellen was already asleep ; and as Dasha, with 
whom she shares the room, was also there, nothing could be 
done about it. In a sense I was quite glad, for I had caught 
a peculiar look of Ellen’s during old Greenfeld’s perform- 
ance, and I was in no mood to-night for explanations and 
“ talking-things-over 

I strolled across the Square in the dark. The tower at 
night always looks enormous against the stars : a friendly 
colossus watching over us. The searchlight has not been 
on for the last two months, since things have quietened down 
in our district. I walked up to the northern fence. All was 
silence and majesty in the great starry illumination. After 

H 



106 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

a while Herman, one of our two Auxiliaries, walked quietly 
up to me and offered me a cigarette. He looked picturesque 
with his rifle and Bersaglieri hat ; but he complained about 
the boredom of being tied down here where there hadn’t 
been a raid for almost three months, while his colleagues in 
Wingate’s Special Night Squads were having a great time 
hunting down Arab terrorists. He spoke with admiration of 
Wingate whose name is quickly becoming a legend through- 
out the country — a kind of Lawrence of the Hebrews. He 
explained to me in some detail the tactics of the counter- 
ambush which Wingate invented, with apparently unarmed 
working parties serving as decoy. I thought it must take 
some guts to act as a decoy, but since our heroic period is 
over, playing at war has lost its attraction for me. And even 
while it lasted and we had two to three raids every week 
and random sniping almost every night, it had soon all 
become a tedious routine and the main worry was lack of 
sleep. (For all that we have killed about thirty terrorists 
and injured a lot more, according to the police reports and 
the blood-tracks we used to find the following morning. But 
the corpses had always vanished as the Arabs invariably 
carried them away.) 

How quickly one forgets if the present is absorbing and 
each day brings new excitements and fulfilments. But to 
start the bloody game all over again would be rather trying. 

I left poor Herman to his martial frustrations and strolled 
back towards the Children’s House. It is a pleasant white 
cubic concrete block with the beginnings of a garden in front. 
I looked in through the mosquito-grating of the open window 
of the nursery, and saw in the faint blue light of the night 
lamp the three toddlers deeply absorbed in the business of 
sleeping. One of them lay with its face to the window, its 
mouth half-open and its clenched fist curiously sticking up 
in the air, in a miniature anti- Fascist salute. 

I wandered on, across the Square, to the cowshed. It is 
also made of concrete and our main pride after the Children’s 
House. For some reason the electric light is left on all night. 
The brightly illuminated interior with its two rows of sleep- 



MORE DAYS 


107 

ing beasts on both sides of the concrete gangway has some- 
thing stage-like and enchanting. One black cow, name of 
Tirza, who is due to calve to-morrow, was standing upright 
alone among her sleeping neighbours. From under her tail 
the foetal bag was already hanging down — a clean, mem- 
branous globe filled with transparent liquid and suspended 
on what looked a thin tubular thread. She turned her head 
as I walked in at the end of the passage and followed me 
with her eyes as I came closer. I always think a cow’s eyes 
have a particularly soft look before she calves, but it may be 
imagination. I rubbed her with my knuckles on her bony 
forehead and she pressed her head against my fist ; and then 
I suddenly remembered the wretched tragedy of our cow- 
shed. We cross Syrian cows with Dutch bulls, as this gives 
the best results in our climate. But as the Dutch race is 
bigger than the Syrian, the head of the foetus frequently gets 
stuck ; and as there is as yet no technique for performing 
the Caesarean on cattle, one has in such cases to kill the 
cow in order to save the calf. At one of our weekly meetings 
Sarah actually made a hysterical fuss about it, accusing us 
of premeditated murder and bringing in Tolstoy, Buddha 
and the Bible. But we have to get through with the wretched 
business, and once we have our crossbreed established it 
won’t have to be done again. However, as Tirza looked at 
me with her soft, sloppy eyes, rubbing her head trustingly 
against my knuckles, I felt rather like Raskolnikow. I also 
wondered whether Tirza had a premonition in her cloudy 
and floating inward awareness that she was going to die. 
Then her neighbour woke with a low, dumb moo, and the 
spell broke. I gave Tirza a pat and walked out of the shed. 

In the Dining-Hut the string quartet was rehearsing a 
movement of Beethoven. I listened for a while, then went 
back to my room in a pacified mood. My restlessness 
seemed to have evaporated in the cool night air. Max had 
turned with his face to the wall and had stopped snoring. 
I felt that my taste for the night-job had returned and put 
about three hundred words of Pepys into Hebrew, complete 
with footnotes and annotations. Seventeenth Century Eng- 



108 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

lish lends itself admirably to translation into biblical language. 
Turns of phrases presented themselves, bowing like willing 
brides. I read over the last chapter, very pleased with 
myself ; smoked my last cigarette (until the next weekly 
issue to-morrow afternoon) ; w'az la'mitta — and so to bed. 

Shabbath 

Old David, the truck-driver of the milk-cooperative who 
often drops in to my workshop for a chat, brought yesterday 
the first news that Bauman has split the Haganah . He has 
walked out of it with about three thousand of his followers 
and a considerable amount of illegal arms, and has gone 
over to the extremists. Old David who is himself a member 
of the Regional Command of the Haganah was stammering 
with indignation. “ Just imagine,” he shouted at me, “ to 
join those hooligans, those Fascist cut-throats who walk about 
throwing bombs into Arab market-places, killing women and 
children. And Bauman of all people ! ” But he didn’t know 
any details. 

I am still unable to understand what happened. If the 
split had been caused by some romantic hothead, it would be 
just another episode in our internal quarrels. But Bauman 
is one of the most balanced and responsible fellows I know. 
He has grown up in the traditions of Austrian Social- 
Democracy and is a Socialist to his bones, by instinct and 
conviction. If he has decided to throw in his lot with 
Jabotinski’s right-wing extremists, then the situation must 
be more critical than we in our isolation know. After all we 
live here on an island — Ezra’s Ivory Tower. I haven’t been 
to Jerusalem or Tel Aviv for more than a year. And we are 
so absorbed in our problems that we lost contact with reality. 
The egotism of a collective is no less narrowing than the 
individual’s. 

I became quite excited and alarmed. Aux armes, 
citoyens ! The only person here with whom one can talk 
about these things is Simeon, so I left my shop in the middle 
of the working hours and went out to see him. He was in 
the tree-nursery, planting a row of saplings. That is hts 



MORE DAYS 


109 

passion. He did not see me coming and I watched him. 
He was absorbed in his work. He knelt with his back to 
me, patting with his hands the hole into which the sapling 
was to go. He closed one eye, gauging whether the centre 
of the hole was exactly in line with the row. His violent, 
unhappy profile was softened up ; it had the self-abandon 
of a child muttering to himself in play. He put the sapling 
in and heaped the earth round it with his fingers ; then 
he remained looking at it quite still on his knees. When he 
noticed me standing a few steps behind him, he blushed ; 
I had violated the chastity of his passion. 

It is curious how most of us develop our specific passions 
here. They are not hobbies, for they are directly connected 
with the job. There is Dasha with her vitamin-and-calory 
mania running the kitchen ; there is Arieh who is so intimate 
with his sheep that I suspect him of committing sodomy 
in the true bucolic tradition ; there is Dina with her 
Children’s House, and Moshe, our Communal Shylock. 
This fusing of job and hobby among the more skilled workers 
is partly of course a consequence of the freer choice of 
occupation which the Commune provides compared with 
town life or individual farming. But only partly. There is 
an additional something in Simeon’s relationship to the trees 
or Dina’s to the children who are not hers. It has to do with 
a new kind of possessive, proprietary feeling which the 
Commune breeds. I feel it in myself, but it is difficult to 
express. Last Shabbath, when we came back after the 
concert from Gan Tamar, this sensation was particularly 
vivid. As we turned late at night from the wadi into the 
dirt-track leading up to the Place, I remembered our first 
night here, my journey with Dina and Simeon on top of the 
swaying truck ; and how we built that dirt-track at dawn, 
sweating and full of vague fears — I seemed to remember 
the imprint of each stone we cleared from the path. It was 
my path, more intimately mine than anything I ever pos- 
sessed, wrist-watch or cigarette-case. And it is more mine 
because this mine-ness is shared by Dina and Simeon whose 
memories echo my own ; for after all the feeling of possessive- 



HO THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

ness towards an object is the reflection of the memories it 
represents ; its value is crystallised memory. And the same 
applies to the Tower which we all saw going up into the air 
like a dead colossus coming to life, and to every building 
we built, to every engine and tool and head of cattle we 
bought. This intimate feeling of possession is common to 
all peasants, but in our case there is more to it. Take an 
individual farmer who has built up his small farm with his 
wife. The value of each shed they have built is enhanced 
for him by sharing it with her, because he shares his memories 
with her, because there is more crystallised memory in it. 
When she dies he feels impoverished — a partnership of 
memories has been dissolved. The Commune is a great, 
dense, tight-woven partnership of memories. Thus by 
sharing everything in the Place with all the others, my feeling 
of mineness is not diminished but increased — and this is 
not a theoretical deduction but the analysis of an intimate 
experience. It could also be applied to analyse patriotic 
emotions — but the Race or Nation are more heterogeneous 
and diffuse bodies than the Commune. 

Later 

I am digressing as usual ; though this time it might be 
an unconscious evasion of the issues which arose in my talk 
with Simeon. I said that he blushed when he became aware 
of my presence. He got to his feet and brushed the dust 
from the knees of his canvas trousers. His tidiness is fan- 
tastic. He never wears shorts, and his trousers, though faded 
and patched like those of the rest of us, are meticulously 
clean and even have a hint of creases — he probably puts them 
under his mattress at night. 

I told him the news old David had brought, though by 
now it seemed to me rather pointless that I had specially 
come to talk to him about it in the middle of working hours. 
There is always a certain embarrassment in the air when 
one talks alone with Simeon. His gaze has a thrusting and 
aggressive quality ; he doesn’t seem to know what to do 
with his eyes while he talks, like an adolescent with his 



MORE DAYS 


III 


awkward hands ; one gets the impression that he would like 
to put his eyes into his pockets. Then, after a minute or so, 
his gaze gets suddenly locked with one’s own and there results 
the same curious awkwardness as when two strangers get 
stuck with their glances in a tram-car or lift. 

“ I know,” he said when I had finished speaking, “ I 
have kept in touch with Bauman.” 

This was news to me ; and yet I had expected that 
Simeon would know more than anybody about this business. 
I also remembered the scene on our first night when Simeon 
was preaching terrorism and Bauman’s curiously dry voice 
when, asked his opinion, he had said : “ I agree with 
Simeon.” 

“ Then will you tell me what prompted Bauman to his 
decision ? ” I asked. 

Simeon paused for a moment, then he said : 

“ How seriously are you interested in this business ? ” 

“ I think we are all equally interested,” I said. 

“ No,” he said slowly. “ The majority are blind and 
dumb. They cultivate our little collective garden and close 
their eyes to reality.” 

“ You were quite happy cultivating your little trees when 
I came,” I said. I had become aggressive because already 
I was on the defensive, because already I knew what was 
coming ; and wanted to escape it ; and still want to escape 
it. But Simeon was no longer embarrassed by my having 
surprised him off his guard ; he said with a kind of sadness : 

“ It won’t be for long. . . .” He looked at his row of 
saplings and said bitterly : 

“ In two, three years there will be the beginnings of a 
forest. ...” 

“ Will you talk to me straight, or not ? ” I said. 

This was when the awkwardness happened and our eyes 
got stuck. But I was wrong in comparing it to the acci- 
dental embarrassment that occurs in a lift ; there is nothing 
accidental about the stark black directness of Simeon’s gaze. 
It is impossible not to avert one’s eyes when confronted with 
such nudity of expression ; and Simeon knows it and that’s 



1 1 2 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

why he tries to put his eyes into his pocket. He seemed to 
measure the degree of my reliability but there was not much 
need for it — in Ezra’s Tower everybody knows everything 
about everybody. 

“ If you want to talk, let’s sit down for a minute,” said 
Simeon. (I am slightly taller than Simeon and he doesn’t 
like to talk uphill.) We sat down, Simeon jerking up his 
trousers between thumb and forefinger. He came at once 
to the point. 

“ The English are preparing to sell out on us. They have 
practically stopped immigration already, and shortly they are 
going to stop it altogether and for good. In Germany the 
night of the long knives has begun ; our people stand lined 
up facing a bolted door while the knife penetrates inch by 
inch into their backs. Most of us here have relations among 
them ; and what are we doing about it ? — arguing about 
Russia and cultivating our little gardens.” 

He spoke quietly, only his hands were rubbing his knee 
as if trying to soothe a rheumatic pain. 

“ Toa,” he went on. “ That is what the dosing of the 
gates means to those outside the walls. To us, who are 
inside, it means that we are caught in a death-trap. We are 
to-day a minority of one to three, and the Arab birth-rate is 
about twice as high as ours. Cut off from the outside world 
our small community will become a stagnant pool, will have 
to adjust its living standards to the native level, become 
levantinised, submerged in the Arab sea. We came on the 
solemn promise that this would be our national home, and 
find ourselves sentenced to live in an oriental ghetto and 
finally to be wiped out, as the Armenians were. . . .” 

He suddenly turned his embarrassing eyes on me, full 
beam. “ Do you think I exaggerate ? ” he asked. 

“ No,” I said. “ Provided that they really intend to stop 
further immigration and to sell out on us, of which I am not 
yet convinced.” 

“ They do. Look how they sold out on the Czechs.” 

4 4 That’s different. Germany is a real threat, while the 
Arabs are not.” 



MORE DAYS 


113 

“ They’ll do it nevertheless.” 

“ How do you know with such certainty ? ” 

“We have our information.” 

“ Who is 1 we * ? ” 

“ About that we may talk another time — perhaps.” 

We sat in the hot sun, side by side. On the slope opposite 
us, about half a mile away, Arieh was grazing his sheep ; in 
the clear, transparent air we could see him lying on his 
back, his hat pulled over his face. Simeon was chewing a 
blade of dry grass and I was doing the same. I felt no 
emotion, only the dull awareness of some fatality slowly, 
smoothly, inescapably closing in on me. 

“ So now,” I said, “ assuming that your political weather 
forecast is correct, what will Bauman and his people do ? ” 
“ Fight.” 

“Whom? How? With what?” 

Simeon repeated his previous phrase : 

“ About that we may talk another time.” 

“ What are you waiting for ? ” 

“ For things to ripen inside you.” 

“ How will you know when I am 4 ripe ’ ? ” I asked. 

“ You will come to me,” he answered with such simple, 
complete conviction that I had nothing more to say. 

Monday 

Tirza had to be killed ; the calf is all right, wobbling 
on its thin legs. It’s a heifer ; we have called it Electra. 

Dina is in hospital with sand-fly fever and won’t be back 
for another fortnight. 

T uesday 

Old Greenfeld’s show has done something to our girls. 
It isn’t exactly the mystic force of the Name working on the 
deaf, but something more prosaic and earthbound ; a stirring 
of ingrained tradition which they thought they had over- 
come. They don’t talk about it, but if one has lived for 
years in an intimate community, one feels the slightest 
changes in the atmosphere. Some of them walk about with 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


114 

a definitely wistful look, which came into their eyes while 
watching the performance under the faded velvet canopy 
and hasn’t left them since. It will pass after a few days as 
it did after old Greenfeld’s last visit, but for the moment the 
air is full of the stale ghosts of the past. 

When, during the noon-break to-day, Ellen came into 
my workshop, I knew that the hour of “ talking things over ” 
had struck. Her eyes bore that expression of dull hurt and 
reproach which has lately become a permanent feature with 
her. And yet it had all started in such a nice, enlightened 
and businesslike manner. No nonsense about love — no 
— agreed. Sympathy — yes — moderate, agreed. Mutual 
need, give and take, agreed. No obligations, no entries 
on the credit or debit columns, quits. The perfect 
barter system on the Schacht model. Christ, were we 
enlightened! 

She lingered and loitered and hovered round the shop and 
finally leant with her back against my working bench, and 
with each moment the shop became more saturated with the 
silent reproach of the wounded but proud female who keeps 
her sufferings to herself, yes, all to herself — unless of course 
you press the button which opens the sluices and drowns you 
in the rushing cataract ; but then it was you who started it, 
was it not ? On the other hand if you refrain from pressing 
the button you are an insensitive brute, and the silent re- 
proach will increase in tension until your nerves vibrate like 
a chord. I decided to be a brute and to avoid touching off 
anything. “ How is the veg-garden ? ” I asked, hammering 
away on the boot in hand. 

“ All right,” she said, but her tone signified “ so what ? ” 
Ellen works in the veg-garden. She is a good and con- 
scientious worker, held in high esteem by the community, 
which all goes to make me feel the more a cad. For it 
must be admitted that the situation is, according to our 
standards, irregular. The regular and simple procedure 
would be to inform the Secretariat of our decision to share 
a room together. There would be a congratulatory party, 
Moshe would have to fork out twenty piastres for three 



MORE DAYS 


*15 

bottles of wine and a cake, and everything would be all right. 
Old Greenfeld would not have to appear on the scene unless 
and until a child was on the way ; and theoretically each of 
us could break up the union and move back to bachelor 
quarters at any time and without giving any reasons ; the 
children, if any, would go on living in the Children’s House 
as before, and there would be no financial or other obliga- 
tions whatsoever. 

Yes, theoretically. But in practice . . . 

“ Joseph,” said Ellen. 

" Yes ? ” 

“ What is the matter with you ? ” 

“ With me ? ” 

“ Yes.” 

“ Nothing is the matter with me.” 

" Really ? ” 

“ Really.” 

Stage dialogue between two enlightened people living in 
a communistic society. ... I began to sweat with the effort 
to remain a brute and not to touch the button. In the hard 
light of the noonday Ellen looked hefty, robust and sexless 
like any farm-wench at work. She had come in straight 
from the veg-garden on her way to the showers. In moon- 
light, the fragrance of a girl’s armpits is an aphrodisiac ; in 
the morning it is a deterrent. Particularly when mixed with 
the smell of cobbler’s glue. But then I also knew that if I 
brought this thing with Ellen to an end, within three days 
I would start running about like a rat poisoned with sex 
hormones. There is no escape from the feminine blackmail. 
Of course if I refused to be blackmailed Ellen would suffer 
the same privation. But the essential difference is that a 
sex-starved woman is compensated by a feeling of virtue 
and moral satisfaction, while the sex-starved male feels in 
addition ridiculous and humiliated. . . . 

Oh, the specious over-simplifications of enlightened 
theorists ! Papa Marx and Uncle Engels made fun of the 
bourgeois family, but had nothing to propose instead ; as 
for the Russians, they have established a code of Proletarian 



Il6 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Morality compared with which our Victorian grandparents 
were wild libertines. 

“ Joseph . . .” 

“ Yes ? ” 

“ I would like to talk things over with you. . . .” 

Bang ! There we go ; there was no escape. And Ellen 
had started biting her nails — the short, square nails of a 
competent veg-gardener and responsible comrade. Well, 
then, if we must have it out, let’s have it out ; I put the 
shoe down and gave up pretending. 

“ Tov” I said. “ We will talk it over on condition that 
you stop biting your nails.” 

She suddenly burst into tears. 

“ Why are you so beastly to me ? At the beginning you 
were quite different.” 

The trite stereotypy of the scene made me indeed feel 
beastly. It is another kind of chess : King’s pawn four, 
Queen’s pawn four — helpless, I knew beforehand the 
answer to everything she or I might say. 

“ 4 The present pleasure,’ ” I quoted, “ 4 By revolution 
lowering, does become The opposite of itself.’ ” 

“ What’s that ? ” Ellen asked, interrupting her snivels. 

“ Antony and Cleopatra , my own translation. In the 
English original it doesn’t sound much better either.” 

“ Oh, please, Joseph, don’t mock me,” she said, starting 
once more to bite her nails and crying helplessly. 

And there it was — pity, the poisonous adhesive plaster, 
which one can’t tear off without plucking one’s own skin. 

“ I am not mocking,” I said. “ The translation comes in 
by right. It is my night-job and half of my life. If we lived 
together in one room I couldn’t work.” 

“ But why ? If you can work with Max there, why not 
with me ? ” 

“ Max doesn’t mind my leaving the light on and trampling 
up and down the room and going for a walk in the middle 
of the night ; he turns to the wall and snores. But you 
wouldn’t be able to sleep, and knowing that I am disturbing 
you, I couldn’t work.” 



MORE DAYS 


I3[ 7 

I knew it sounded a laboured excuse though it was true ; 
but only half the truth. The other half — that Max’s 
presence in the room was a neutral one whereas hers would 
be a constant impingement, a saturation of the room’s space 
which would make all privacy and work impossible ; that, 
in short, I wanted at intervals the amenities of her body but 
not her constant company — how on earth could one say 
this without horribly wounding a fellow-creature whom one 
likes and respects ? So this “ talking-things-over ” must 
always remain a farce. Our enlightened three-quarter truths 
are sometimes worse than the Victorian half-truth. They 
frankly oppressed the flesh by the tyranny of sacramental 
consent ; we grant it a certain autonomy but are still far 
from recognising its full, sovereign right of independence. 
And it is easier to rebel against a tyranny than against an 
unctuous, hypocritically liberal compromise. It would be 
easier for me to refuse to marry Ellen if she were a con- 
ventional middle-class prude, than to deny her claims on 
intimate companionship beyond the purely sexual. 

Ellen was sobbing and biting her nails in complete 
misery. “ I promise I won’t disturb you,” she sobbed. It 
was a promise as futile as humiliating to make ; and this 
self-abasement of a proud and strapping girl made me ache 
inside and made the adhesive poison the more effective. 

“ Why ? ” I asked in despair. “ Why do you insist on a 
thing which we both know won’t work ? ” But I knew that 
my arguments made no difference ; and suddenly I had a 
suspicion. 

44 Or are you going to have a baby ? ” 

She shook her head, and violently blew her nose. 

“ Look, Ellen. In the capitalistic world girls want to get 
married for reasons of prestige and economic security. 
Among us here there exists no such thing. Even if you 
have a baby it doesn’t make the slightest difference whether 
we live in one room or not. Our huts are at a distance of 
twenty yards and we can see each other as often as we like. 
So why do you torture us both and spoil everything ? ” 

Ellen swallowed hard to control her sobs, and started 



Il8 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

hiccuping instead. It was pathetic. With a small, timid 
voice, and looking the other way, she said between two 
hiccups : 

“ Don’t you ever want to sleep with me — I mean really 
to sleep, all night, side by side, and wake up in the morning 
together ? 55 

(That is precisely what I do not want.) 

u But darling, of course, I want it very much. But don’t 
you understand ? . . 

“ To grant the Crown Colonies of the Flesh full sovereignty and 
independence , as the Honourable Member for Ezra's Tower proposes , 
would inevitably lead to chaos and anarchy t* — “ Hear , heart* 

“ If we don’t like it,” Ellen interrupted, “ we can always 
separate again, can’t we ? ” 

“ . . . . The Crown Colonies of the Flesh have , however , the 
constitutional means to appeal against any alleged infringement of 
their rights and may be assured that a sympathetic hearing will be 
given to their case — “ Hear , heart * 

“ Well, you know> Ellen,” I said, “ you know as well as I 
do that it isn’t quite so easy to divorce here, although 
theoretically there is no obstacle. So far we have had only 
one case, and you remember all that hue and cry about poor 
Gaby’s ‘ unsocial behaviour ’ and 4 disruptive tendencies ’ 
because she got fed up with Max and went to live with 
Mendl. , . .” 

There was a silence ; then abruptly Ellen jumped down 
from the bench. She had realised the futility and humiliating 
nature of our discussion. 

“ All right,” she said. “ Save your arguments. Anyway, 
I know what, or who, is the cause of it all. . . .” 

I knew it too ; but I didn’t ask her, and she had the 
decency not to mention Dina. She walked out, slamming 
the door behind her. 

Damn old Greenfeld. 

Haven’t seen Simeon the whole day. 



MORE DAYS 


II 9 

Wednesday 

The Assistant District Commissioner and his wife were 
here yesterday to pay us their annual visit. This time they 
came without the Major. Newton seemed to be impressed 
by what we have made of the Place — which, when he saw 
it the first time a year ago, was just a fenced-off quadrangle 
in the desert. He didn’t say much, only hummed and 
hawed in his absent-minded way that makes one think that 
he is always trying to work out some chess-problem (which 
he probably is), but nevertheless one could see that he was 
impressed. We took them over the fields, veg-garden, tree- 
nursery, laundry, etc. etc., and didn’t miss a single chicken 
to show off with. I suppose he sees much the same thing 
in all the Settlements ; it will take some time until we get 
accustomed to the idea that our cows and chickens are just 
like other cows and chickens, and stop boring visitors with 
our childish pride about each tomato we grow. 

Looking across to Kfar Tabiyeh, Newton mentioned that 
they are going to assist next week at the great peacemaking 
ceremony which is to end the twenty-year-old blood feud 
between the families of the two Mukhtars. When I said 
that several of us are also invited to the ceremony, Mrs. 
Newton pulled a face as if we had been gate-crashing into 
the Club at Roonah. She looked more pinched than ever and 
seemed surprised that we had not been wiped out by the 
Arabs, and were still alive and kicking. According to custom 
they had lunch with us in the Dining-Hut, and as usual the 
food was poor — onion soup and noodles with gravy. “ Is 
that what you eat every day ? ” she asked, apparently im- 
plying that we had cooked a specially filthy lunch for them 
on purpose. Had we given them a rich meal she would have 
remarked afterwards on poor Arabs and guzzling Hebrews. 
To ease the tension I told them the story of Sir Arthur 
Wauchope’s famous lunch at Khefziba. When Wauchope 
was appointed High Commissioner of Palestine, he paid a 
formal visit to Khefziba, one of the oldest Communes in the 
Valley of Jezreel. It was a rather ceremonious and political 
occasion, and the Khefziba people gave the new High Com- 



120 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

missioner a princely meal. “ Do you eat every day like 
this ? ” Wauchope asked ; whereupon Lederer, the Secretary 
of Khefziba, said : 

“ Your Excellency, when we heard about your proposed 
visit we called a meeting to discuss whether you should eat as 
we eat every day, or whether we should eat as you eat every 
day ; and we decided to adopt the latter course.” 

Newton tittered. When we showed them the Children’s 
House, Mrs. Newton said : 

“ Do you know to whom they belong ? — I mean who 
the fathers are ? ” 

There was a dreadful silence, poor Newton coughing and 
humming, and then Moshe said with a poker face : 

“ No, Madame. You know, we draw lots.” 

“ Oh, do you ? How interesting,” said Mrs. Newton, 
whereupon several of our girls started to giggle and the 
unfortunate female went crimson. God, how she must 
hale us. 

Simeon was invisible as long as the visit lasted. 

Thursday 

Worked all day in the shop, repairing shoes. Without 
the two sheets of leather from Gan Tamar half the Com- 
mune would have to run bare-foot in the coming rains. 
Repairing shoes is a very gratifying job, almost more so than 
making new ones. One has the surgeon’s satisfaction in 
healing, without the risks ; not even the oldest boot gets 
internal haemorrhage under my knife. I like the smell of 
fresh leather and of the glue ; I always have to whistle when 
I drive the tags into a heel — it’s a conditioned reflex. The 
work is never monotonous ; there are no boring preliminary 
stages, as for instance in carpentry preparing the wood with 
sand-paper. The transformation under my hands of a mud- 
caked, punctured, twisted, wrinkled relic into a shining, 
re-born, as-good-as-new boot is quick and exhilarating ; I 
feel like a benevolent magician. 

There is no other trade which provides the same intense 
contentment. A patch on a suit is a blemish ; hence repair- 



MORE DAYS 


1 21 


tailors are a meek, diffident race with a look of secret guilt 
in their eyes. Or, if you are a garage-mechanic, you are 
always liable to come up against some nasty hitch on a job ; 
a big rusty bolt which has got stuck somewhere where you 
can’t get at it with the spanner, or a broken part for which 
there is no spare at hand. Hence garage-mechanics always 
look grumpy and reserved, and if asked how long the job 
will take they answer with wary and depressing you-never- 
can-tells ; whereas I can always tell and have no fear of 
committing myself. My tags go in like a knife into butter 
and give me a sensation of effortless power. To cut a fresh 
leather sheet with a sharp knife following the curved contour 
of the heel gives me a clean, sensuous pleasure. 

Take my opposite number, the hairdresser. He plays 
about with flimsy and futile embellishments on the top, 
whereas I provide the indispensable foundations for men 
walking the earth. Hence the hairdresser is a chatty, scatter- 
brained Figaro, whereas the cobbler appears in all popular lore 
as a dignified and serene philosopher, full of contentment 
and benevolence. I can imagine myself at no other perma- 
nent manual task ; the monotony of digging in a field would 
drive me crazy in a fortnight. I can’t understand that the 
others don’t all covet my job. But then Dasha and Moshe 
and Mendl and the other maniacs probably feel the same. 

. . . Why do people babble about the Red Scare, when it 
stands to reason that in a poor agrarian country nothing but 
a communal type of organisation can give a man sufficient 
scope to work only eight hours and to make his hobby 
his job ? 

Oh God, why can’t I stay as I am. I was a fairly exacting 
chap, and yet, You see, here I have found peace — or as 
much peace as I am capable of holding. I have asked for 
much and yet, You see, I am content with little if given in 
the right way. I love these hills, and my day-job and my 
night-job ; I am approved of and I approve ; I like and am 
liked. Sometimes, lying on my back in the sun, I whisper the 
words of the Song: “ and his banner over me was love. . . 

i 



122 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


Oh, let me stay as I am. You have twice expelled us 
from the Land and driven us from Spain and turned us into 
a race of eternal tramps ; and however we try to disguise 
ourselves they smell us out and hold us up to derision in the 
nakedness of our flesh ; now that the wheel is coming back 
full circle, with dry blood on each of its spokes, can’t You 
make it stand still at last, at last . . . ? 

I seem to be getting hysterical. I thought there was not 
much selfishness in coming here to live as a cobbler in the 
barren hills of Galilee ; and now according to Simeon it is 
pure egotism and escape. 

I wish Dina were back and I could talk to her. 

To-morrow our string quartet will give its first concert 


3 

The peace-making ceremony in Kfar Tabiyeh was the most 
important event of its kind for many years in the district. 
Preparations for the great reconciliation meal had begun 
several days beforehand and a number of guests had been 
invited, among them a party of English people from Jeru- 
salem, which was to include the wife of the Assistant Chief 
Commissioner, Lady Joyce Gordon-Smith. 

The blood feud between the two leading clans of the 
village, the Hamdans and the Abu Shaouish, went back to 
Turkish days. To keep the balance, the Turkish and later 
the British rulers had always appointed the most distinguished 
member of each of the two clans to dual mukhtarship. 
Fifteen years ago Issa’s great-grandfather, Hadj Saade el 
Hamdan, had been murdered by a member of the Abu 
Shaouish clan. An atwa or truce had been arranged, but the 
negotiations on the blood-money had broken down, and 
after biding his time for eight full years, Issa’s grandfather 
had killed the murderer, who had meanwhile been appointed 
Mukhtar on the Abu Shaouish side. 



MORE DAYS 


123 

The reasons why Issa’s grandfather had waited so long 
before he avenged the family's honour were two. First, the 
murderer was a cautious man, well aware of the constant 
danger in which he lived, and it was therefore necessary to 
wait for an opportunity and lay a carefully prepared trap. 
Secondly, Issa’s grandfather had preferred to wait until the 
murderer had attained the same age and dignity as his 
victim at the time of his death, to make the act of revenge 
more impressive and satisfactory. Issa’s grandfather enjoyed 
a wide reputation for his strict observance of tradition and 
etiquette, and the way he had killed his victim was to this 
day held up as an example of savoir-faire in the whole 
district. When, at the price of patience and cunning, he 
had at last succeeded in surprising the Abu Shaouish Mukhtar 
alone in his sleep, he had knelt down beside him on the mat 
with his knife in his hand, had shaken him by the shoulder : 
“ Wake up, ya Abu Shaouish, for you have killed my father 
and the time has come for you to die,” and had then cut his 
throat from ear to ear. He was taken to prison and kept 
there for a while, but nothing could be proved against him 
as twenty members of the Hamdan clan solemnly swore that 
he had spent the critical time in their company, discussing 
the weather. 

That had been seven years ago. Again an atwa was 
arranged which expired three days after the murder, and was 
extended to three months against payment of fifteen pounds 
by the Hamdan clan to cover the expenses which the victim's 
clan had incurred by entertaining mourners, visitors and 
police. But the second atwa also expired, and despite the 
efforts of the dignitaries, Reformers and professional Arbi- 
trators of the district, it was again found impossible to make 
the two clans agree on the amount of blood-money to be 
paid either in camels or cash. A third atwa was, however, 
arranged, which cost the Hamdans a considerable amount of 
money and which was to last “ until Peace was concluded 
and forgetfulness obtained As months and years passed 
and peace was still not concluded, it became a matter for 
new dispute whether the atwa was still in force or not. 



124 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Several times during these years members of the two clans 
had come to blows which led to loss of limbs, teeth and eyes 
but not to the loss of life, as both families were careful not 
to complicate the main issue. Meanwhile Issa’s father had 
been appointed Mukhtar in succession to the Old Man, and 
it was clear to everybody that the Abu Shaouish were merely 
waiting until he had reached the proper age, renown and 
wealth to avenge the honour of the family. Best of all 
knew this the Hamdan Mukhtar himself, and despite the 
elaborate precautions he took to protect his life he never 
really felt safe ; and what with the additional worries about 
the Patriots in the mountains and the Hebrews on the Dogs’ 
Hill, he felt like a man walking in the shadow of an evil cloud. 

However, some six months ago a new, efficient District 
Officer had been appointed by the Government, a young man 
of ambitions named Jussuf Tubashi. This young man had 
studied at the University of Beyrout, was an admirer of the 
Roman dictator, and determined to make a career in the 
Government Service so that later, when the English and 
the Hebrews were driven out, he might become one of the 
leaders of the nation on the path from mediaeval backward- 
ness towards the modern corporate state. Tubashi, who was 
naturally anxious to prevent a stupid murder in his district 
which would cast a blemish on his career, threw himself with 
youthful zeal into the task of mediation, and succeeded in a 
few weeks where the old dignitaries had failed in years : 
by mixing threats with persuasion, he induced the Abu 
Shaouish to settle the old feud against a reasonable amount 
of blood-money, and the Hamdans to pay it. This day was 
to be the day of his first triumph, and he had seen to it that 
the peace-making ceremony was given the proper publicity 
in the Arab Press and the higher circles of Jerusalem Society. 
When three days ago Mr. Newton, the Assistant District 
Commissioner, had informed Tubashi, his Junior District 
Officer, that the wife of Mr. Gordon-Smith, the Assistant 
Chief Commissioner, would herself be among the guests, 
Tubashi was convinced that henceforth his career was made. 

Lady Joyce Gordon-Smith, who had lived for five years 



MORE DAYS 


125 

in the country but had never been at an Arab peace-making 
before, had gladly availed herself of the opportunity to escape 
the boredom of Jerusalem by joining a party of Englishmen 
to Kfar Tabiyeh. She was in her early forties, tall and 
county-bred with regular features — a Wiltshire Juno as an 
admirer had once called her — with a preference for tweeds 
and flat-heeled shoes and a constant look of just-having- 
come-out-of-the-bath on her cool, aseptic skin. The rest 
of the party consisted of Cyril Watson, a dark and fidgety 
young man who lectured on Elizabethan Poetry for the 
British Council in Jerusalem, and Squadron Leader James 
Abdul Rahman Henderson who had embraced the Moslem 
faith, looked like a football professional and worked for In- 
telligence. There was also a third, elderly Englishman, a 
retired Lieutenant-Colonel named Wyndham, who did not 
belong to the party. He had fought during the first world 
war as a Battalion Commander in the Jewish Legion and 
had been known as a fierce disciplinarian among his men, 
who suspected him of an anti-semitic bias. However, as 
soon as the war was over Wyndham had published a book 
which was a passionate plea for the resurrection of the 
Hebrew State based on the prophecies of Isaiah, had retired 
from the Army and bought a small house on Mount Carmel 
where he lived alone, doing his own cooking and house- 
work, and known to everybody as “ the Colonel He was 
rather unpopular among the British Colony because of his 
pro-Zionist views, and equally unpopular with the Zionist 
leaders whom he accused of cowardice for not having yet 
driven out the Arabs and proclaimed the Hebrew State. 
He was a short, dry and taciturn little man of a pronouncedly 
military bearing, with a rather fixed stare in his eyes and an 
aura of loneliness about him. 

The Jerusalem party and the Colonel had arrived from 
different directions but almost at the same time in the 
morning, and had been directed by District Officer Tubashi 
to the house of the murderer’s family, where according to 
custom the guests were to assemble. The Hamdan Mukhtar 
received them on the terrace of his house ; he was beaming, 



126 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


and magnificent to look at in his new silver-spun agal. There 
were also two or three silent old men of the Hamdan clan 
who were ceremoniously introduced to the newcomers. Issa 
served sweet black coffee in thimble-cups, lowering his eyes 
before Lady Joyce Gordon-Smith’s somewhat disconcertingly 
frank Junoesque stare, and they all sat down on the low wicker 
stools on the balcony. Squadron Leader Abdul Rahman 
accepted a water pipe and a rosary of yellow beads to play 
with, and the Mukhtar beamed delightedly. The con- 
versation dragged on, Tubashi translating with great fluency. 

Cyril Watson, who could not bear sitting still at parties 
for more than five minutes, strolled over to the parapet. 
“ What’s that village over there ? ” he asked, pointing with 
his coffee-cup towards Ezra’s Tower. Tubashi translated 
with a knowing smile, discreetly lowering his voice as if to 
apologise for a tactless question. “ Oh, that is the Hebrew 
settlement,” the Mukhtar said in a non-committal tone. 

“ I see,” said Watson. “ Rather spoils the view, doesn’t 
it ? ” 

Tubashi translated with an even more delicate smile. 
The Mukhtar too smiled, non-committally. “ That is as it 
pleases the Government,” he said. 

“ Ask him where the murderer is,” said Lady Joyce. 
Tubashi translated, reverting to his normal conversational 
voice. 

“ Ah, they want me to introduce the murderer to them ? ’ 
the Mukhtar said, beaming again. He turned to Issa : 
“ Call Abu Arkub, son.” 

Issa went into the house and returned a moment later with 
a shrivelled and seedy-looking little man, who remained 
standing at the door and touched his forehead and heart 
with an obsequious smile. 

“ Is that your father ? ” Lady Joyce asked, staring. 

The Mukhtar laughed boisterously. ‘ Oh, Abu Arkub, 
did you hear that ? The lady thinks you are my father. 
Ha ! ” The little man smiled sourly. “ No,” the Mukhtar 
explained, becoming serious again. “ He is my cousin. 
My father is in his room, slightly ill, and regrets to miss the 



MORE DAYS 


127 


great pleasure of being introduced to the guests.” 

Tubashi translated. “ I thought somebody said the 
murderer was his father,” said Lady Joyce. 

“ It has never been proved,” Tubashi explained with his 
delicate smile. 4 4 Also, it would be inconvenient for the old 
gentleman to submit to the rituals of the ceremony. This 
man is a poor relative of our Mukhtar’s and it has been 
decided that he should be the murderer.” 

44 I see,” Lady Joyce said drily. The vicarious murderer, 
seeing that people had lost interest in him, touched his 
forehead and withdrew. 

44 When is the show going to start ? ” asked Cyril Watson. 

44 Oh, soon. In an hour or two perhaps.” 

Watson sighed, wiping his face out of habit though it 
was not hot. He carried his handkerchief in his sleeve, but 
most of the time he held it in his hand crushed into a ball. 
44 What’s that growing over there ? ” he asked, looking down 
into the valley. 

44 Barley,” Tubashi explained. 44 It is the winter crop 
coming up.” 

44 And on the field to the right ? ” 

44 That is also barley.” 

44 But why is the barley to the right so much higher than 
the other barley ? ” 

Tubashi translated the question to the Mukhtar. 44 The 
barley to the right,” he explained , 44 is grown by the Hebrews, 
They use fertilisers.” 

44 I see,” said Watson. 44 Why don’t you use fertilisers 
too ? ” 

Tubashi translated and the Mukhtar shrugged with a 
resigned smile. 44 We are poor,” he said. 44 This is a very 
poor village. We even have to hire the tractor of the 
Hebrews at two pounds and a half per dunum.” 

44 A peppery price, by Mohammed,” Abdul Rahman 
Henderson remarked in Arabic, smoking his water pipe with 
an impassive face. 

The Mukhtar gave no answer, smiling like a long- 
suffering man who bears his cross with patience. 



128 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


“ That is as it pleases the Government,” he said. 

“ I think you people are having a bloody unfair deal,” 
said Cyril Watson. Tubashi translated ; the Mukhtar kept 
smiling blandly, saying nothing. He stood with his back to 
the parapet with arms folded, a tall and imposing figure. 
There was a silence, suddenly interrupted by the Colonel, 
who up to now had not spoken a word. 

“ That is all stuff and nonsense,” he said sharply. “ Ask 
him whether it is true that when he married his daughter 
three months ago he had the marriage room papered with 
pound notes.” 

Tubashi translated. The Mukhtar beamed. 

“ We have our customs of hospitality,” he said modestly. 
“ A man will ruin himself to do honour to his guests.” 

“ Tell him,” said the Colonel, “ that one square yard of 
that wallpaper is enough to buy a tractor and fertilisers for 
the whole district.” 

“ Ah, no, Colonel,” Watson intercepted, indignantly 
kneading his handkerchief. “ I object. You can’t ask them 
to change their traditions overnight. Next you will want 
them to open Woolworth branches and chemist’s shops in 
the desert.” 

“ Or synagogues,” the Squadron Leader muttered half 
aloud, the pipe of the nargileh in the corner of his mouth. 

The Colonel looked from one to the other with his parade 
stare, and subsided into silence. 

“ What did they say ? ” the Mukhtar asked Tubashi. 

“ They are arguing among themselves,” Tubashi said, 
smiling. 

“ Tell our guests,” the Mukhtar said measuredly, “ that 
we are not of those who always bewail their misfortunes in 
the ears of the world, as certain people do. We have no 
propaganda offices in the capitals of Europe and no gold to 
buy newspapers and influential friends. We are a poor, 
simple and hard-working people who only ask that the earth 
which belonged to our fathers and fathers’ fathers should not 
be taken away from us.” 

Tubashi translated with a certain solemnity, and there was 



MORE DAYS 


129 

another short silence, ended by the arrival of Assistant 
District Commissioner Newton and his wife. There were 
more introductions. Mrs. Newton wore a Mickey Mouse 
brooch, a Coronation scarf with the portrait of the Royal 
Couple, and a complicated hat which a Jerusalem modiste 
had copied from a Beyrout fashion paper. “Oh, we have 
met before,” she said in her genteel est accent to Lady Joyce 
Gordon-Smith. “ Have we ? ” said Lady Joyce. “ On the 
boat,” Mrs. Newton said. “ Oh,” said Lady Joyce, still 
staring incredulously at the hat, “ one always forgets faces 
from a boat, doesn’t one ? ” 

There was more coffee handed round and they all sat or 
stood about not quite knowing what to do with themselves, 
in the paralysing atmosphere common to all social functions 
where the otherwise separate communities mixed. To make 
the awkwardness complete, Kaplan, the Hebrew District 
Officer, also turned up with his usual gloomy look. He was 
a native of the country — his grandfather had been one of 
the “ Lovers of Zion ” who, in the middle of the nineteenth 
century, came on foot from the Russian ghettoes to settle in 
the Land. He was a tough, wiry and bitter man, whom years 
of struggle against biassed superiors had taught to distrust 
the government which he served. Between Kaplan and his 
colleague Tubashi it had been a case of mutual detestation at 
first sight. With his immediate superior, Mr. Newton, he 
got on relatively well because he shared the latter’s passion 
for chess ; but Mr. Newton resented Kaplan’s efficiency, 
while Kaplan despised Mr. Newton’s muddling ways. Be- 
sides, Mrs. Newton hated the Hebrew District Officer and 
had a melting weakness for Tubashi who took her out riding 
to Arab villages where all were nice to her. 

There was another round of coffee. “ Heavens,” Lady 
Joyce remarked to Cyril, “ I feel all scorched and black 
inside. Will they never start ? ” 

“You must never refuse a cup — it’s a deadly offence,” 
said Cyril, who prided himself on his knowledge of Arab 
etiquette. 

Tubashi, who had overheard Lady Joyce’s rather audible 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


130 

remark, whispered something to the Mukhtar, who nodded 
consent. Tubashi clapped his hands and there was at once 
an expectant silence. 

“ Ladies and gentlemen/’ Tubashi cried, “ as the cere- 
mony will not start for a little while yet, our Mukhtar invites 
you all for a walk to show you the village.” 

They consented with relief and began descending the 
steps of the terrace in pairs, Lady Joyce leading the pro- 
cession with Squadron Leader Henderson, and the Mukhtar 
with the silent elders of his clan bringing up the rear. 
Tubashi ran back and forth, explaining things with his 
obliging dragoman-smile. They followed the one cobbled 
serpentine road wending its way between the mud huts, 
with the gutter in the middle. “ Would you like to see the 
interior of a hut ? ” Tubashi suggested. 

The procession came to a halt in front of a small area of 
two or three square yards, fenced off by a row of stones which 
were meant to indicate a wall. In the middle of this area, 
in front of the mud hut, squatted a woman swathed in black, 
cooking the family dinner. Her cooking utensils were a rusty 
petrol tin poised on two bricks over a fire of twigs which gave 
out a thick smoke. She had blue dots tattooed on her fore- 
head and chin and looked sixty, though she was probably 
not over thirty, to judge by the naked infant whom she had 
taken from her breast at the approach of the strangers. Three 
more children of various ages squatted round her on the 
stony ground charred all over by previous dinner fires. As 
the procession came to a standstill in front of her she made 
a move as if to run into the house, but remained sitting on 
the stones, her eyes cast down, stirring the brew in the 
petrol tin with a twig. 

“ What’s that she is cooking ? ” asked Lady Joyce. 

Tubashi questioned the woman. She muttered some- 
thing, without lifting her eyes. 

“ It is a soup ; they make it from a herb. I don’t know 
how it is called in English.” 

Lady Joyce bent over the tin with its greenish liquid. 
“ Sorrel,” she pronounced. 



MORE DAYS 


131 

“ Yes. It grows everywhere around.” 

“ Is that all they have for dinner ? ” 

Tubashi asked the woman, and repeated the question 
rather harshly, as she did not answer at once. 

“ She says there will be bread too.” 

He led the way into the interior of the mud hut. The 
hut was a single room without windows. Half of the floor 
was covered with straw for the donkey which slept there. 
The other half was empty except for a torn mat on the 
earth, a big black goat’s-hair blanket under which the family 
slept, and a board supported by two more petrol tins on 
which lay a few rags and a toothless comb, which made up 
all the possessions of the family. 

“ Please ask the Mukhtar what her husband’s occupation 
is,” said Cyril Watson when they were outside again, 
stuffing his handkerchief, which he had held pressed against 
his mouth, back into his sleeve. 

The Mukhtar gave some lengthy explanations. 

“ He says,” translated Tubashi, “ that her husband is a 
railway worker. He has suffered several misfortunes ; his 
roof fell in and he had to pay to have it mended. Also his first 
wife died a year ago and he had to buy himself a new one.” 

The Mukhtar added something, smiling contemptuously, 
and Tubashi translated : 

“ He says this one is of the cheapest sort — he got her 
for five pounds.” 

The woman, with eyes downcast, went on stirring the 
soup with the twig, her face expressionless as if she were 
deaf. One of the children began to cry. Its eyes were sticky 
with the Egyptian disease and flies were crawling over them 
in clusters. The guests stood looking on in silence. Sud- 
denly the Colonel barked out : 

“ Ask your Mukhtar why they don’t learn from the Jews 
how to co-operate.” 

Tubashi translated, his face impassive. The Mukhtar 
answered in a measured, polite voice. Tubashi translated : 

“ He says that they believe in the will of God and that 
they don’t believe in socialism.” 



132 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

The procession moved on. They visited a second hut 
which looked a little more prosperous : there was a wooden 
partition separating the donkey from the family, and also 
separate mats for the children. In a corner sat a very old 
woman ; the Mukhtar addressed some jocular remarks to 
her which she answered with a rapid torrent of words. 

“ They think she is a witch,” Tubashi explained. 
“ People here are still very superstitious. She sells marriage 
charms to young men before the wedding.” 

“ What do they need charms for once they have secured 
the bride ? ” asked Lady Joyce. 

“ Oh — they are marriage charms, not love charms,” 
Tubashi said elusively, with some embarrassment. 

“ I know what he means,” said Cyril to Mrs. Newton 
as they walked on. “ They are charms against impotence. 
You wouldn’t believe how many of these village lads are 
impotent on their bridal night. It’s perfectly frightful. A 
Jewish doctor in Tiberias told me about it. Sometimes 
several months pass before the marriage is consummated. 
It’s of course because all these lads have to remain virgins 
until they can marry, and besides there is that most embar- 
rassing ceremony when the mother rushes into the bridal 
chamber to fetch the sheet with the proofs of her daughter’s 
honour with the whole village waiting outside, you know 
what I mean. It’s perfectly disgusting, and of course any 
man would be impotent under the circumstances.” 

Mrs. Newton had turned first pink, then crimson, which 
Cyril didn’t notice as he rarely looked at the person to whom 
he was talking. He chattered on, glad to show off his know- 
ledge of Arab ways. 

“ There is also lots of homosexuality among them of 
course. As they have to wait for years until they have the 
money to buy a wife it’s only natural. And their women 
aren’t so very attractive, or are they ? They are sometimes 
quite frank about it. You can often see pairs of good- 
looking lads walking along the road holding hands, or with 
their little fingers interlocked. In a way it’s quite charming, 
sort of bucolic, if you see what I mean. And there is quite 



MORE DAYS 


133 

a lot of sodomy, too, of course. Most of their jokes are 
about sheep and nanny-goats and so on. . . 

“ Mr. Watson,” cried poor Mrs. Newton, gasping. “ I 
must ask you to stop at once. Nobody has ever dared to 
speak to me of such improper things.” 

Cyril looked at her flabbergasted, and his dark, restless 
eyes fastened for a second on the Mickey Mouse brooch and 
Coronation scarf. “ Oh, I am frightfully sorry,” he mumbled. 
“ I didn’t mean to. . . . It’s only sort of — I mean folklore 
and all that, you know. ...” 

He gave it up, wiping his face with his handkerchief. 
Mrs. Newton walked on with lips compressed in silence, 
holding her chin up. While Watson was speaking she had 
kept looking back at her husband, with the idea of asking 
him to protect her outraged honour, but Mr. Newton had 
looked as usual hopelessly pacific and absent-minded. He 
was walking with Kaplan, to whom he had just remarked : 

“ I’ve now played through all the games butthree of the New 
York tournament, and I am more and more inclined to believe 
that the Indian opening is just a mode which won’t last.” 

“ No,” said Kaplan with his usual grimness of tone. “ It 
is not just a mode, it is a new step in the evolution of the 
game. It’s manoeuvring under cover for position, which 
replaces the cavalry style of the old-fashioned King’s pawn 
openings, just as in soccer the strategy of the low pass re- 
placed the old kick-and-run technique. In both cases it is 
planned, co-ordinated, collective action succeeding to indi- 
vidual bravado. The style of all games is influenced by 
changes in the pattern of social life.” 

“ I must think about that,” said Mr. Newton. “ You 
may have hit upon something there. ...” He was, as 
usual, both impressed by, and resentful of, his District 
Officer’s tiresome cleverness. 

They came to a large open space at the lower end of the 
village. At the further side of it great activities were going 
on ; women were busy round three open fires over which 
three whole sheep were suspended on spits, while two long 
deal boards on trestles, with a few wicker stools for the 



134 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

European guests, were being prepared as a banqueting- 
table. The smoke of the burning twigs mixed with the 
fragrance of slightly charred meat and burning herbs, and 
made everybody’s mouth water. 

44 Doesn’t it smell heavenly ?” said Cyril. The Jerusalem 
party had been travelling since early morning, and now it 
was two hours past lunch-time. They all looked wistfully 
towards the other end of the open space. 

“ They are preparing the peace-making meal,” Tubashi 
explained genially. 44 According to tradition it is the 
victim’s family who prepares it and the murderer’s family 
who pays for it.” 

“ Let’s go and watch how they do the sheep,” proposed 
Lady Joyce. 

“ I am sorry, we cannot go to that part of the village 
before peace is officially made,” said Tubashi. 44 Over there 
is where the Abu Shaouish live. We can’t cross this space 
before the end of the ceremony. But our Mukhtar invites 
us to go back to his house and have some coffee.” 

With a sigh of resignation they turned back towards the 
Mukhtar’s house. The Mukhtar pointed at a small, white- 
washed stone building in the forbidden part of the village, 
out of which flocked a crowd of barefooted little boys. They 
were all in rags and had close-cropped hair, which made 
their brown heads look like billiard balls. 

“ That is the school,” Tubashi translated the Mukhtar’s 
explanations. 44 All little boys go there up to the age of 
twelve.” 

“ He means ten,” remarked Kaplan. 

“ All right, ten, Mr. Kaplan,” said Tubashi with his im- 
perturbable smile. 4 4 This is of course a very poor village. 
They cannot yet afford to give much education.” 

44 Nonsense,” the Colonel suddenly rapped out after 
having been silent for the last half-hour. 44 It’s the Govern- 
ment who pays, and if the village would add its share they 
could have a proper school.” 

44 Now look, Colonel, we are their guests, or aren’t we ? ” 
muttered Cyril. 



MORE DAYS 


135 


“ Where’s the girls’ school ? ” asked Lady Joyce, 

Tubashi translated, and for the first time he looked a 
little embarrassed. 

“ He says it is against tradition to send girls to school. 
. . . But this is of course a very backward village,” he added 
in an aside. “ Soon ...” 

“. . . And a jolly sensible idea it is,” the Squadron 
Leader muttered through his pipe. 

“ Don’t be an ass, James,” said Lady Joyce. “ Let’s go 
back.” 

While the procession marched back towards the Mukhtar’s 
house, Kaplan said to Mr. Newton : 

“ When are you at last going to do something about it ? ” 

“ About what ? ” Mr. Newton asked, on the defensive. 

“ About this school business. The Hebrews pay for 
their own schools and the Government pays for the Arab 
schools. But the Government’s revenue comes chiefly from 
the Hebrew taxpayer. If we have to finance Arab education 
we at least want it properly run.” 

“ Since when have you taken Arab education so much 
to heart ? ” Mr. Newton asked, with an effort to be sarcastic. 

“ Since I’ve discovered that our only chance to come 
to terms with them is to have them properly educated. 
You can’t come to an agreement with a fanatical horde of 
illiterates. I want to get some sense knocked into their 
heads so that we shall have a mentally grown-up partner 
to deal with.” 

“ You’ve always got your colleague Tubashi,” said Mr. 
Newton, resentful at being lectured to again. “ Why can’t 
you come to an agreement with Tubashi ? He’s been to a 
university, so there.” 

“ A fat lot of good it did him,” said Kaplan. 

“ Well, you can’t have it both ways, my dear fellow — 
well, well . . .” said Mr. Newton, happy that he had at 
last scored a point. 

They were back at the Mukhtar’s house. During their 
walk more guests had assembled on the terrace : Arab digni- 



136 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

taries from other villages, two imams, a school teacher 
and a Beduin sheikh. There were also two young men in 
khaki shorts, the treasurer and the cobbler of the Commune 
of Ezra’s Tower. They stood, leaning against the parapet, 
a little apart from the Arab guests, chatting together in 
Hebrew as if they were at home. There were more intro- 
ductions and more rounds of coffee in thimble-cups. The 
Mukhtar greeted the young men from Ezra’s Tower with 
solemn courtesy. 

“ I hear that you are expecting more of your friends to 
come to live with you,” he said. 

“ So we are,” said Moshe. “ And there are even more to 
come in spring.” 

“ They are welcome,” the Mukhtar said blandly. “ This 
is a poor country and a small country and soon there will 
not be land enough for anybody ; but they are wel- 
come. . . 

“. . . Look,” said Cyril to Lady Joyce, “ those Jewish 
settlers talk Arabic quite fluently.” 

“ They would,” said Lady Joyce. “ They are all infant 
prodigies.” 

“ I always wanted to live for seme time in one of their 
settlements and find out about their social organisation and 
all that.” 

“ Do,” said Lady Joyce. “ You’ll have a lovely time 
eating kosher fish and sleeping with all the nice fat girls.” 

“ I don’t know,” said Cyril, fidgeting. “ I suppose one 
ought to go and talk to them. But they are so overpowering.” 

The Mukhtar, making solemnly the round of his guests, 
had moved on to the Beduin sheikh, and Kaplan joined the 
two young men at the parapet. 

“ How are things up there ? ” he asked. When he talked 
Hebrew his voice lost its bitterness and sounded almost 
warm. 

“ Everything under control,” said Moshe. “ Expendi- 
ture is going up, income is going down, twenty-two per cent 
are on the sick-list, and there is a new draft arriving next week. ’ * 

“ I know,” said Kaplan. “ They are refugees, mostly 



MORE DAYS 


137 

fresh from Europe, without any vocational training. You 
will have a bloody time until you get them assimilated.” 

“ Everything will be under control,” said Moshe. 
“ Can’t you use your authority as a Government official to 
get us some grub ? ” 

“ Patience,” said Kaplan. “ Patience ; don’t hurry ; 
take your time, are the three commandments of a Govern- 
ment official and the common ground where the British and 
Arab philosophies meet. Ten years in His Majesty’s service 
have taught me that there is a deep affinity between the 
British and the Oriental outlook on life. The same detach- 
ment, the same traditionalism, the same mystic belief that 
somehow in the end everything will work out all right.” 

“ Is that fellow with the pipe the famous Henderson ? ” 
asked Joseph. 

“ Yes, our pocket Lawrence in person. Last week he 
was again visiting in Arab costume the Mukhtars in my 
district, telling them that the Government doesn’t like it if 
they sell land to us, and dropping the usual hints.” 

“ And can’t you do anything ? ” 

“ What ? Protest to Newton P Nobody can touch 
Henderson’s outfit. The right hand isn’t supposed to know 
what the left hand is doing.” 

There was a movement in the crowd on the terrace. “ It 
looks as if something’s going to happen,” said Joseph. 

“ Don’t tell me it’s the banquet,” grunted Moshe. 

“. . . Ladies and gentlemen,” cried Tubashi, and there 
was an expectant silence. “ The peace-making ceremony is 
going to start now. Please form into pairs, and then we 
shall all walk behind the murderer and his family to meet 
the victim’s family and rejoice at their reconciliation.” 

There was a general shuffling of feet and Abu Arkub, the 
murderer, appeared from inside the house. He had pulled 
the top part of his striped kaftan over his head so that he 
appeared hooded, and he wore his agal, the black head-cord, 
hanging round his neck as a symbol of accepting the yoke of 
bondage. He also carried a stick in his hand, at the end of 
which was fastened his kefiyeh, the white head-kerchief, 

K 



138 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

the tassels of which were tied in knots. 

The procession started moving down the terrace, the 
hooded murderer in front, bent under the symbolic yoke 
and carrying the kefiyeh on his stick like a flag of surrender. 
Behind him walked the Mukhtar leading his blind father by 
the arm ; for just before the procession started the old man 
had suddenly hobbled out to the terrace, haughty and awe- 
inspiring, and apparently not at all sick. Behind them 
marched the silent elders of the clan, the Arab dignitaries 
and the European guests. 

The procession marched slowly along the cobbled road, 
with staring women and children clustering in the doors of 
the mud huts. A scraggy pariah-dog ran for a while along- 
side them, but a vigorous kick from Issa sent him sprawling 
on his back, with blood trickling from his muzzle. 

“ Isn't it simply fascinating ? " Cyril said to Lady Joyce. 
“ Everything in the ceremony has its special meaning which 
dates back to Mohammed's day. For instance the knots on 
the kefiyeh. They stand for the blood-money — each knot 
represents a certain sum, either ten pounds or thirty pounds, 
I forget which. Of course the blood-money was originally 
paid in camels ; cash is a concession to the march of time." 

“ Why not in motor-cars ? " said Lady Joyce. “ A Ford 
for a simple murder and a Rolls for a dignitary." 

“ You can't take anything seriously," complained Cyril. 
“ Have you got no feeling for tradition and all that ? " 

“ I am hungry," said Lady Joyce. 

They had arrived at the open space which divided the 
domains of the two Mukhtars, and the procession came to 
a halt. Tubashi bustled round, arranging them all into 
groups. The Hamdan family was lined up in a row, the 
guests stood in clusters a little distance away. The stick 
with the murderer’s kefiyeh was planted in the earth. Mean- 
while from the other end of the space the Abu Shaouish were 
advancing towards them in single file. They looked poorer 
than the Hamdans, except for their Mukhtar who led the 
procession. He was a tall, bony man with one eye con- 
spicuously missing. 



MORE DAYS 139 

“ That’s the real stuff,” Cyril whispered. 44 He looks 
like a brigand.” 

There was a great silence while the Abu Shaouish formed 
themselves into a row facing the Hamdans. 44 Looks as if 
they were going to sing an opera chorus,” Lady Joyce said. 

Henderson took his pipe from between his teeth. “ Usu- 
ally they don’t make this fuss,” he remarked. 44 Tubashi 
arranged it to show off to us.” 

44 What’s he declaiming ? ” asked Lady Joyce — for 
Tubashi, standing between the two rows and next to the 
white flag, had started on a speech. 

44 It’s about peace and forgiveness and the common 
cause,” said Henderson. 

It was hot, and the afternoon breeze wafted the delicious 
smell of shashlik across the space. Presently Tubashi 
stopped. There was faint and dignified clapping, then 
silence. Suddenly the Abu Shaouish Mukhtar shouted 
something in a raucous voice which sounded like an insult, 
and there was clapping again, and Tubashi hurriedly untied 
one of the knots on the murderer’s kefiyeh. 

44 What’s that mean ? ” asked Lady Joyce. 

44 The victim’s clan has just announced that in honour of 
the King they are reducing the blood-money by ten pounds.” 

The man standing next to the Abu Shaouish Mukhtar in 
turn shouted something, and there was more clapping and 
another knot untied. 

44 That’s for King Farouk of Egypt,” said Henderson. 

“ I thought the sum was agreed beforehand ? ” 

“ It is. And so are the remittances.” 

Another announcement was made and another knot 
untied. 4 4 Ten pounds for Mr. Chamberlain,” Henderson 
translated. 44 Ten for President Roosevelt. Ten for His 
Excellency the High Commissioner. Ten for the District 
Commissioner. Ten for myself.” 

44 You ? ” said Lady Joyce. 44 What about little me ? ” 

44 Women don’t come in. — Ten for the Sheikh. Ten for 
Tubashi. That’s the lot.” 

44 They have given away a fortune,” said Lady Joyce. 



140 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ Theoretically. It makes the sum look more important,” 
said Henderson. 

The Hamdan Mukhtar advanced and, wetting his thumb, 
counted a wad of notes into Tubashi’s hands who, amid more 
clapping, handed them over to the Abu Shaouish Mukhtar. 
The remaining knots were untied on the murderer’s kefiyeh 
which unfolded in the breeze. 

There was a tense silence while all eyes were turned on 
the murderer. Presently he detached himself from the 
Hamdan row and, humbly bent in his hood, advanced across 
the space which separated the two clans. When he arrived 
in front of the tall Abu Shaouish Mukhtar he stood still for 
a second, then lifted the Mukhtar’s hand to his lips and 
kissed it. The Mukhtar drew the murderer up to him and 
kissed him on both cheeks. There was renewed clapping 
while Abu Arkub moved along the Abu Shaouish row, kissing 
each man’s hands and being kissed on his cheeks. Then he 
righted himself and seemed to have suddenly grown a head 
taller. There was more clapping. 

The murderer now having obtained formal forgiveness, 
it was the turn of the other members of his family to get 
reconciled. The first to advance was the Hamdan Mukhtar, 
leading his blind father by the arm. When the old man 
stood in front of the Abu Shaouish Mukhtar whose father 
he had killed, there was a last moment of tension. Then 
the Hamdan Mukhtar guided the blind man’s two hands 
towards his enemy’s right which hung limply by his side ; 
but at the moment when their hands touched, the Abu 
Shaouish Mukhtar threw his arms round the old man’s 
shoulders and kissed him prolongedly and with fervour. 
The two groups mixed, shouting, kissing and patting each 
other ; some of the older men were seen crying. 

“ There is, after all, something to be said for tradition,” 
Joseph said to Moshe, as the whole gathering was moving 
with alacrity towards the banqueting tables. 

“ Not if it’s become a parody,” said Kaplan who was 
walking next to them. “ You should have heard the Bedu 
Sheikh’s comments.” 



MORE DAYS 


141 

44 What did he say ? ” 

4 4 He was so indignant, he almost got a stroke. He is the 
Sheikh of one of the Ruheiwat tribes who live mainly on 
smuggling hashish from Syria, and he's got all the contempt 
of the pure Bedu for the degenerate cross-breeds who live 
in towns and villages. He calls them mongrels, sons of 
bitches, and denies that they are Arabs at all. He is a great 
fellow. Would you like to meet him ? ” 

44 Is he a friend of yours ? ” 

44 He is my blood-brother,” said Kaplan, grinning. 44 I 
once got him out of a mess — but that’s a long story. . . . 
Oi, ya Sheikh ! ” he called to the tall figure walking a few 
steps ahead, who now stopped and with a quick swerve 
turned towards them. 

44 This is my brother, Sheikh Silmi of the Ruheiwat,” 
Kaplan introduced in Arabic, 44 and these are my friends 
Jussuf and Mussa, two Hebrews from the settlement across 
the valley and very good boys.” 

44 My brother’s friends are my friends,” said Sheikh 
Silmi, shaking hands with them. He was an elderly, dark 
and vivacious man, with a sparse black beard along the edge 
of his jaw which ended in an abrupt tuft on his chin. 

44 I was telling my friends that you did not like the 
ceremony,” said Kaplan. 

44 It was a mockery,” said Silmi. 44 It was like monkeys 
playing at being Arabs.” 

They arrived at the table, where the English party and 
some of the notables had already taken their places. 44 Will 
you tell my friends the Bedu legend which you just told 
me ? ” Kaplan asked Silmi when they were seated. 

Sheikh Silmi smiled broadly, baring his teeth. 44 As you 
wish,” he said. 44 At the beginning of the world there was 
nothing but a strong whirlwind in the desert, and God 
caught a gust of this wind and out of it he created the Beduin. 
This Beduin shot an arrow into the air and God caught it 
and made it into the camel. Then God bent down and 
picked up a lump of clay and made it into the donkey. And 
after that God saw that he had forgotten something, and he 



142 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

bent down again and picked up the dung which the donkey 
had dropped, and out of it he made the peasant.” 

The sheep were brought on enormous wooden dishes, 
surrounded by mountains of rice, and the meal took its 
traditional course. There were more speeches and more 
coffee, and at the end of the meal a fantasia, with the village 
youths galloping round the square on their small underfed 
horses and shooting their rifles into the air. 

44 Habibi ,” Moshe said to Joseph with a discreet belch, 
44 if we did that, they would confiscate the rifles as illegal 
arms and put us into jug. We are not picturesque.” 

44 Shut up,” said Joseph. u You have filled your belly 
with their food, so stop grumbling. I am enjoying myself.” 

44 You go on enjoying yourself,” said Moshe. 44 And I’ll 
go on wondering where they got those new Mausers from.” 

44 You must ask the Duce,” said Kaplan. 

44 What are you a Government official for ? ” asked 
Moshe. 

44 To play chess with my superiors and collect taxes from 
you,” said Kaplan. 44 And if you don’t like it here you can 
bloody well go back where you came from.” 

At sunset the Jerusalem party set off. 

44 Did you notice,” said Cyril Watson to Lady Joyce, 
“ how those boys from the Hebrew settlement behaved ? 
They looked as if they were making dirty cracks all the time, 
and it never occurred to them to come over and talk to us.” 

44 What else did you expect ? ” said Lady Joyce. 

4 4 1 thought you wanted to go and live with them to study 
Communism,” said Henderson, lighting his pipe. 

They were all tired, and walked for a few steps in silence. 

44 1 don’t know,” Cyril said after a while. 44 One’s got 
to be fair to them. Persecution and all that. But I must 
say, you can’t call them encouraging.” 

44 Never mind,” said Joyce. 44 You go and study them 
and sleep with the girl comrades.” 

44 . . . Whereas these Arabs,” Cyril mused, 44 whatever 
you think of them, they’ve got a certain style.” 



MORE DAYS 


143 

44 That’s it,” said Joyce, getting into the car. 4 4 And now 
you’ve settled the problem I want to sleep all the way back 
from here to Jerusalem.” 

4 4 Did you notice,” Moshe said to Joseph as they were 
riding back, on horses borrowed from Gan Tamar, towards 
Ezra’s Tower , 44 did you notice that not one of these English 
people said a word to Kaplan or to either of us ? ” 

44 I did,” said Joseph. 44 Why didn’t we go and talk 
to them ? ” 

44 Me ? ” Moshe puffed indignantly. 44 Crawl before that 
arrogant bunch of Herrenvolk number two ? ” 

44 They are less arrogant than shy,” said Joseph. 44 Inhi- 
bitions are a national disease with them.” 

44 What a misunderstood nation,” said Moshe. 44 They 
had to grab an Empire out of sheer timidity.” 

Joseph patted the head of his horse. It was a small Arab 
horse and he thought of the pony he used to ride in the 
bygone days, and of the lawn in front of the spacious 
Elizabethan house, and of Mr. Watkins the gardener who 
preached on Sundays in the Methodist church. 

44 At home they are different,” he said. 44 It is unfair to 
judge them by the type we meet out here. When people 
talk about the French, they mean the Frenchman in France. 
When they talk about the English, they mean the Englishman 
abroad — the tourist and the colonial. But you can live in 
England for years without seeing anybody of this type — 
except in the comic cartoons.” 

44 I can only judge by those I know,” said Moshe. 44 If 
they are so unrepresentative as you say, they shouldn’t send 
them abroad. Don’t try telling me that poor Henderson is 
pitting the Arabs against us because he’s shy and has 
inhibitions.” 

Joseph gave no answer. He felt a little irritated by 
Moshe, as he often did. But after all it was not his business 
to defend the English. If they always appeared in the wrong 
light it was their own fault. Why could they never show 
themselves as they really were ? Why did they disdain to 



144 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

give explanations and hold the judgment of the world in 
such sovereign contempt ? 

“ You know it is more complicated than that,” he said 
after a while. 

“ You don’t say.” 

“ It is a kind of double-decker sandwich. There is a 
crusty top layer of apparent arrogance, which in fact is just 
shyness, as I said. When you pierce that, there is a soft 
layer of jolliness and decency. But when you get through 
that too, you find the bottom layer of real conceit, which is 
the more unshakable as it is elastic, mumbling and inco- 
herent. It is the arrogance of the under-statement, which is 
worse than boasting.” 

“ Tov , tov” said Moshe. “ Whether it’s a double-decker 
conceit or simple arrogance is all the same to me.” 

Having said his evening prayers and put on his blue-and- 
yellow striped pyjamas, the Hamdan Mukhtar voluptuously 
stretched his huge body in his bed. It was the first time for 
many years that he had gone to bed without the shadow of 
danger hovering over his dreams. He was too excited to go 
to sleep at once, and after a while called for Issa. Issa came 
in, his abaye hurriedly thrown over his underclothes. 

“ Well, ''son,” said the Mukhtar with unusual geniality, 
c * thanks to God it was a great day.” 

“ Yes, Father,” said Issa. 

“ With God’s help there will be peace in the village now 
for ever,” said the Mukhtar. 

“ So help us God,” said Issa. 

“ Did it hit your eyes that the English and the Hebrews 
did not speak together ? ” the Mukhtar asked thoughtfully. 
“ There must be something behind this. And Henderson 
effendi made a certain remark . . 

“ What did he say, Father ? ” 

The Mukhtar looked at the pock-marked face of his son 
and didn’t like it. But he had to talk to somebody. 

“ He made a remark about the Dogs’ Hill. He said it 
was not certain that there would be more settlers coming to 



MORE DAYS 


145 

live there. He did not say anything clearly. Henderson 
effendi always talks in riddles.” 

“ What does it mean, Father ? ” 

“ I don’t know,” said the Mukhtar. “ But it is certain 
that they did not talk together. They are like cats and dogs, 
thank God. ...” He laughed to himself, and added : 

“ If there are cats and dogs, what else is there ? This is 
also a riddle, son. 1 ” 

“ I don’t know,” said Issa. 

“ The stick,” said the Mukhtar, He laughed to himself 
and would have liked Issa to laugh with him. But Issa only 
gave a sour smile, and the Mukhtar stopped laughing. “ The 
stick,” he repeated. “ The stick beats both, the cat and 
the dog.” 

“ Yes, Father,” said Issa. 

Outside in the hills, the moon was just rising over Ezra’s 
Tower ; the big, peaceful, orange-coloured moon of Galilee. 


4 

Pages from the chronicle of Joseph, a member of the Commune 
of Ezra's Tower 

Sunday , November . . . 1938 

Since last week our population has almost doubled. 
Ezra’s Tower now counts 77 souls : 41 old settlers (including 
the five children), plus 11 newcomers who are to become 
permanent members of the Commune, plus 25 boys and 
girls who are to spend here six months of their vocational 
training. 

The whole of last week was simply bedlam. All the sweet 
peace and routine wrecked, shattered, blown to smithereens. 
Oh, our salad days, legendary days, days of youth and 
innocence. 

The eleven new settlers were the first to arrive. They 



146 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

came on Tuesday. All we knew about them was that they 
were a mixed bag — Germans, Poles, Rumanians, and even 
an Egyptian — whom our Colonisation Department was to 
dump or rather graft on us, as a first instalment of further 
grafts which, within a year or two, should bring us up to 
our full establishment of two hundred adult workers. We 
further knew that they had only recently arrived in the 
country and were refugees — as distinct from us who, with 
the exception of Dina and Simeon, had all come before 
persecution in Europe had started in earnest and more or 
less out of our own free choice. Finally we knew that they 
were seven men and four girls, all unmarried so far, and our 
bachelors of both sexes were looking forward to their arrival 
with ill-concealed expectations. Particularly Gaby, our red- 
haired Viennese Messalina who, having a year ago left Max 
for Mendl, has now left Mendl too — (who, however, does 
not seem to care much, dividing all his time between the 
tractor and the string quartet). 

Anyway, we rigged up our three disused tents from the 
early days, put up a streamer with “ blessed be he who 
comes ” across the gate in the fence, and hoped for the best. 
They came from Tel Aviv in a truck and arrived during the 
midday break ; so all of us except those working out in the 
fields lined up at the gate to welcome these newcomers with 
whom, for all we know, we are going to spend the rest of 
our lives. 

As the big lorry jolted up the dirt-track with the eleven 
settlers standing upright in a bunch, and their bundles and 
possessions piled up messily around them, my first impres- 
sion was that of a transport of survivors from a fire or 
earthquake who had saved whatever came first to their 
hands ; there were mattresses, saucepans, a cuckoo-clock, 
a granny-armchair, a bicycle and even a bird-cage. But they 
were singing full blast “ El yivne ha-galil ” and that im- 
proved things a little ; though, as the lorry turned in 
through the gate, we all stared at them silently and dumbly, 
like an assembly of village yokels at the arrival of the summer 
guests. I too felt paralysed, and for a second I saw in a 



MORE DAYS 


*47 

frightening flash our own crowd of heavy, slow-moving men 
and women, mute, wary and backwoodish as we had become 
during this first long hard year. . . . But then we began 
running alongside the lorry, escorting it to the Square, 
waving and shouting, and the spell was broken. The lorry 
stopped in front of the Tower and the new ones jumped 
down and started singing the anthem, standing nicely to 
attention ; so we did the same, joining in. We hadn’t sung 
the anthem for God knows how long, and it was all rather 
solemn. In the middle of it one of the new girls began to 
cry ; she is very fat with a round pudding-face, and she 
went on singing the refrain with the tears streaming down 
her face : 

Not yet dead is our hope, the ancient hope 

To return to our Land, the ancient Land, 

To return to our town, the town which David built. . . . 

The second face which caught my eyes was the Egyptian’s. 
He is swarthy to the point of being quite a Coloured Hebrew 
Gentleman, with the bluish- white eyeballs and the rubbery 
loose-jointed limbs of a negro step-dancer. He stood to 
attention in complete stillness of body — one of the things 
that Jews as a rule are unable to do — with even his pupils 
immobilised ; they were turned upward, fixed on the top- 
most point of the Tower. The third one I noticed was a 
lean and gauche young man, the typical German Akademiker 
and future Dr. Phil, (subject : Neo-Kantianism). He had 
jerked to attention over-eagerly with all his muscles cramped 
and now stood looking as if his bones had been broken and 
re-set in the wrong way, trying to readjust them by little 
fidgets. I made a vow not to dislike him and had already 
broken it at the end of the first verse. Meanwhile Gaby’s 
eyes had begun melting at the Egyptian (she seems to be 
capable of having an orgasm in her pupils), while Sarah’s 
pinched little bird-face assumed that expression of primly 
indignant refusal which always comes over it when a man 
appeals to her starved senses. While we went on singing it 
occurred to me that, while with nine out of ten men Gaby 



148 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

would win hands down, in the case of the Egyptian boy it 
was just possible that the first impact of Adlerian psycho- 
therapy would lay him out and make him forsake Gaby’s more 
obvious charms. Then my eyes fell on Moshe, standing 
opposite me and singing full blast, while his gaze wandered 
with an experienced pawnbroker’s appraisal over the goods 
and chattels heaped on the truck, which from to-morrow will 
enrich our Communal stores. 

When the anthem was over we all flocked into the dining- 
hut, and the process of making friends with the new ones 
began. Max took the fat girl under his protection, his tapir- 
nose was fairly sniffing at her while he talked with great 
agitation (probably about the necessity of fostering Arab 
Trade Unions). She listened, obviously not understanding 
a word and admiring him with her good big cow-eyes. Ellen 
was engaged in a serious and measured conversation with 
the Dr. Phil., now and then looking at me from the corner 
of her eyes. Dina took no part in the thawing-up proceed- 
ings. Contact with new arrivals from Europe always has a 
bad effect on her. She sat on the furthermost end of a 
bench, spooning her soup with a listless, withdrawn air. 
Since she is back from hospital the blue shadows under her 
eyes have deepened and she looks lovelier than ever. 

On the whole we were doing our best ; and yet it will be 
a long time until we make the new ones feel at home, and 
until we ourselves accept them. And even then, I feel, there 
will always remain a difference — hardly perceptible, un- 
avowed, and yet implied in all relations. There will be 
memories of the early days which they do not share, allusions 
and jokes from which they will feel left out. They will always 
regard us as old-timers, the Mayflower - aristocracy of the 
place ; and so shall we ourselves, in the secrecy of our 
hearts. (And, when all is said, we have built this place out 
of the wilderness, or haven’t we ?) But when the next graft 
arrives they will look up to both the older groups with awe 
and respect, unable to distinguish between them ; — like the 
last arrival in the doctor’s waiting-room who, unaware of the 
hierarchy previously established, lumps together all those 



MORE DAYS 


149 

present into one category of “ those who were here before 

This little patrician arrogance will remain lingering about 
us and in due time we, the original seven-and-thirty, will 
become, as in Dagania, Khefziba and Kfar Gileadi, a bunch 
of picturesque elders, with pipes and gout and prophetic 
beards — respected, legendary, and rather tiresome. . . . 
That is, those of us who live to see the day. 

Later 

The advent of the youth-group was less inspiring. To 
tell the truth, rather depressing. 

It is not the first time that I have felt frightened by our 
new generation. These twenty-five adolescents of both sexes 
are fairly typical ; they are all Sabras — bom and educated 
in the country ; they are all between sixteen and nineteen. 
The larger part of them are sons and daughters of farmers 
from Petakh Tikwa, Rosh Pina, Metullah and other villages 
of the old type, founded before the time of the Communes. 
The others come from the towns. School and the youth- 
movement brought them together and they formed a group 
with the aim of founding a Commune of their own. They 
will spend six months of their vocational training with us, 
and will be settled in about a year’s time, on land promised 
to them by the National Fund in the Eastern part of the 
Valley of Jezreel, somewhere near Beisan. The group counts 
in all about a hundred and fifty youngsters who have been 
split up into smaller units for the period of their training. 

So far so good. It is a good sign that many among the 
native youth want to go in for Communal life. This choice 
is of course made easier for them by our propaganda in the 
schools — our teachers are all Labour or I.L.P., and the 
Teachers’ Trade Union sees to it that no right-wing heretics 
creep into the flock. With that too I agree — all education is 
propaganda for one way of life or the other ; so why not 
propagate the way in which we believe ? And yet, there is 
already a difference between us, who came from abroad 
groping for a new form of social and national existence, an 
experimental Order or Fraternity such as has never been 



150 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

tried before — and they, who slip into a ready-made form, 
guided by their elders. For us, the choice involved a 
revolutionary negation of our past — for them, it is an act 
of conformism. 

That, however, would not matter so much. When a 
nebulous experiment solidifies into an institution, that only 
proves that it has succeeded. We do not want romantics and 
permanent upheavals. We want a stable pattern of life for 
our people. And if the new generation accepts the pattern 
which we evolved, there should be nothing but rejoicing. 

And yet something inside myself, perhaps my innate 
scepticism, tells me that all this is too good to be true. The 
snag is not in the institution, but in the human quality of 
the new generation. I have watched them ever since they 
arrived — these stumpy, dumpy girls with their rather coarse 
features, big buttocks and heavy breasts, physically pre- 
cocious, mentally retarded, over-ripe and immature at the 
same time ; and these raw, arse-slapping youngsters, callow, 
dumb and heavy, with their aggressive laughter and un- 
modulated voices, without traditions, manners, form, 
style. . . . 

Their parents were the most cosmopolitan race of the 
earth — they are provincial and chauvinistic. Their parents 
were sensitive bundles of nerves with awkward bodies — 
their nerves are whip-cords and their bodies those of a horde 
of Hebrew Tarzans roaming in the hills of Galilee. Their 
parents w T ere intense, intent, over-strung, over-spiced — 
they are tasteless, spiceless, unleavened and tough. Their 
parents were notoriously polyglot — they have been brought 
up in one language which had been hibernating for twenty 
centuries before being brought artificially back to life. . . . 

There, in the language, is the main rub. The revival of 
Hebrew from its holy petrifaction to serve again as the living 
tongue of a nation was a fantastic achievement. But this 
miracle involves a heavy sacrifice. Our children are brought 
up in a language which has not developed since the begin- 
nings of the Christian era. It has no records, no memories, 
hardly any trace of what happened to mankind since the 



MORE DAYS 


151 

destruction of the Temple. Imagine the development of 
English having stopped with Beowulf — and even Beowulf 
is a thousand years nearer to us ! Our Classics are the books 
of the Old Testament ; our lyrics stopped with the Song of 
Songs, our short stories with Job. Since then — a millennial 
blank. . . . 

To talk in an archaic idiom has of course its charms. 
We travel in a bus and offer a cigarette to a neighbour : 
“ Perchance my lord desires to make smoke ? ” — “ No, 
thanks. To make smoke finds no favour in my eyes.” 

But we are no longer conscious of this quaintness of our 
speech ; where all walk on stilts nobody will stop to wonder. 
And so this young generation is brought up in a language 
which suffers from loss of memory ; with only the sketchiest 
knowledge of world literature and European history, and 
only a very dim idea of what everything was about since the 
day when the Ninth Legion under Titus captured David's 
Citadel. They speak no European language except a little 
English on the Berlitz-school level ; the not too numerous 
and not too competent translations of world classics strike 
no chords in them ; the humanistic hormones of the mind 
are absent, no Latin or Greek being taught in our schools. 
As against this, they know all about fertilisers and irrigation 
and rotation of crops ; they know the names of birds and 
plants and flowers ; they know how to shoot, and fear 
neither Arab nor devil. 

In other words, they have ceased to be Jews and become 
Hebrew peasants. 

This of course is exactly what our philosophy and propa- 
ganda aims at. To return to the Land, and within the Land 
to the soil ; to cure that nervous overstrungness of exile 
and dispersion ; to liquidate the racial inferiority complex 
and breed a healthy, normal, earthbound race of peasants. 
These Hebrew Tarzans are what we have bargained for. So 
why am I frightened of them ? 

Perhaps because of the eternally conflicting values of 
creativeness and security. On one side the fever and the 
vision ; on the other side the sluggish pulse of health. On 



152 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

one side of the scales persecution and otherness as spurs to 
spiritual achievement ; hectic prophets and sick messiahs 
from Jesus to Marx and Freud. On the other side of the 
balance the price we had to pay for them ; the smell of tons 
of burning flesh on the stakes of Spain ; enough spilled blood 
to fill the Dead Sea ; the stink and filth and claustrophobia 
of the ghetto ; the deterioration of the hereditary substance 
through the survival of the nimblest, the humblest, the 
crookedest, into its final product, the flat-footed, shifty-eyed 
eternal tramp. 

In Buchenwald they now hang people on hooks by their 
mouths, like carps. Who would not swap all the formulae 
of Einstein to take a single jerking wrench off his hook ? 

But who, having completed the transaction, would rejoice 
about it ? 

I almost forgot the episode which frightened me most. 
It was a story one of the young Tarzans told me with a grin 
when he saw me through the open door of my room working 
on Pepys. It was about a friend of his, born and educated 
in the Commune of Herod’s Well. When that boy was thirteen, 
his father made him a gift of a fountain pen. When he was 
seventeen, he wrote a letter to his father which said : 4 4 Dear 
Daddy, to-day I have finished school. So I shall not need 
that pen any more and am sending it back to you.” 

That was an extreme case. But it is no use denying that 
these young Tarzans are a step backward and that it will take a 
series of generations until we catch up again. It is a deliberate 
sacrifice but that does not make it less depressing. Rousseau 
was lucky that the French did not take him seriously ; had 
they followed his advice and all become shepherds and tillers 
of the soil, he would have hanged himself. 

Wednesday 

The Commission appointed by the British Government 
to work out suggestions for the partitioning of the country 
has published its report. According to their recommenda- 



MORE DAYS 


153 

tions the Jewish State should comprise less than one per 
cent of the total area of Palestine — a rectangle forty miles 
long and ten miles wide — excluding most of our settle- 
ments, excluding the whole of Galilee, the Valley of Jezreel, 
everything. It is not a political report but a printed sneer 
of derision. 

Together with the report, the Government has issued a 
White Paper rejecting partition — though not on the grounds 
of the monstrosity of the proposed frontiers, but because of 
the “ political and financial difficulties involved Instead, 
there is to be a Round Table Conference to decide the future 
of the country — a Conference to which not only the two 
interested parties, but all the Arab States are to be invited. 
This is an innovation. I have never heard of Britain inviting 
Iraq and Syria to take part in their discussions with Egypt. 
It can only mean one thing : they are looking for an excuse 
to get rid of their obligations to us and to bury the idea of 
our National Home. Our future is under its debris. 

Thursday 

Simeon is in hospital in Haifa with typhoid. I wish he 
were back. The indifference of our people here towards the 
political situation drives me crazy ; they do not even seem to 
realise that something is wrong. Most of them only read the 
headlines in the papers. In the evening everybody is tired 
and can’t be bothered ; it is the old, honest and disastrous 
attitude : “ we are doing our job ; leave the rest to the 
politicians.’ * 

Last night there was a celebration ; Judith, Moshe’s wife 
and head of our laundry, has come back from the maternity 
hospital with twins — inmates number six and seven of 
the Children’s House. There were sweet wine and cakes 
and the obvious jokes about Moshe’s methods of rationalising 
production. As their room has just enough standing-space 
for ten people we took turns to get in ; Moshe stood at the 
door, sturdy like a prize bull, shaking everybody’s hands 
with an earnest face and puffing with pride. As we drink 

L 



154 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

wine only five or six times a year, even two small glasses of 
the revoltingly sweet stuff have an exhilarating effect ; so 
there was a horra in the Square with Mendl doing his Pied 
Piper act and the new ones getting quite out of hand ; the 
Egyptian dancing like a dervish, and the Dr. Phil, falling 
over his feet and breaking his glasses and generally making 
a fool of himself. The youth-group for a while looked on 
critically at us rapturous elders and then started a horra of 
their own among their tents, yelling and arse-slapping like a 
horde of Tarzans in the jungle. 

Round midnight some of us had drifted into the kitchen 
for the traditional “ cumsitz ” with coffee and biscuits. 
There was the usual crowd — Reuben, Moshe, Max, Dina, 
Dasha and myself. I turned on the midnight news on the 
radio in the dining-hall, but of course there was nothing. I 
knew it would only lead to one of our usual sterile arguments 
but I couldn’t keep quiet, so I started by asking the cumsitz- 
assembly what they thought should be done about the 
situation. 

There was a hush of resentment, and at once I felt guilty 
for disturbing the celebration — we don’t have so many of 
them. Then Reuben said cautiously : 

“ The Partition proposal was a scandal — but after all 
they have turned it down.” 

“ Don’t you see,” I said, “ that the fact alone of the 
publication of such a monstrosity is characteristic of their 
approach to the whole problem ? One per cent of the 
country — think of it ! It indicates the lines along which 
they search for what they call a * reasonable compromise \ 
First they publish an insult with the comment that un- 
fortunately for technical reasons it cannot be carried out ; 
then they invite the representatives of the Moslem countries 
to decide upon our fate — having plainly hinted to them 
what the Government itself thinks should be done with us.” 

“ Oh — you exaggerate as usual,” said Dasha. 

“ Joseph’s got under the influence of the Bauman-people,” 
said Max. “ He wants to throw bombs first on the Arabs, 
then on the English.” 



MORE DAYS 


155 

“ Oh, shut up,” said Dina. “ Bauman is no fool.” When 
Dina talks about politics, her eyes assume the gravity of a 
child wondering whether it should eat its chocolates now 
or later. 

“ No fool ? ” cried Max. “ When he’s throwing in his 
lot with Jabotinsky and his Fascist terrorists ? ” 

“ Look, Max,” I said. “ Can’t we keep internal party 
politics out of it ? ” 

“ No,” said Reuben quietly, “ you can’t. These people 
are fighting our Trade Unions and Labour Party tooth and 
claw. They have not created a single settlement of their 
own. They have split the Hagana y our defence organisation. 
They have no constructive achievements and nothing in 
their heads but shouting and playing at soldiers.” 

“ In other words they are Fascists. Hebrew Fascists,” said 
Max. 

“ You can’t call Bauman a Fascist,” said Dina. 

“ Why not ? ” cried Dasha. “ They throw bombs into 
Arab markets, killing women and children.” 

“ They turn the heads of young fools like Benjosef,” said 
Max, “ inducing them to commit some idiotic outrage and 
get hanged for it. And Benjosef s accomplice was a lunatic 
whom they had to send to an asylum. That’s symbolic. 
Fanatics and lunatics, the lot of them.” 

And so it went on. I was all the more furious because I 
knew that half of what they said was true. I let myself go 
and turned on Max. 

“ That fool Benjosef,” I shouted, “ was the first Hebrew 
hanged in this country since Bar Kochba’s last stand against 
the Romans. You talk as if you hated that boy, who after all 
died for our cause, more than those who put the rope round 
his neck. God damn your objectivity. A race which remains 
objective when its life is at stake will lose it.” 

They were all silent for a second or two, but my anger 
didn’t subside. Oh, what a relief it was to forsake objectivity 
and close my eyes to their point, to all the “ buts ” and 
“ ifs ” which I see as well and better than they do. And 
letting myself go I carried them — at least for a minute. 



156 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ Now, Joseph,” said Ellen with all the seriousness of a 
responsible veg-gardener in a socialist rural settlement, 
“ now, Joseph, let’s be reasonable. . . 

“ But I don’t want to be reasonable,” I shouted. “ I 
have had enough of being reasonable for two thousand years 
while the others were not. I was the reasonable fly running 
in zigzags over the window-pane because there was light on 
the other side and I had my legs torn out and my wings 
burnt off with matches. I am through with your reasonable- 
ness.” 

“ So what do you propose to do ? ” Reuben asked coolly. 
Despite his calm voice I heard the warning undertone. 

“ I don’t know,” I said, feeling my rage change into 
impotence. “ I only know that we have been offered one 
per cent of our country as a reasonable compromise. And 
I know that on that first night here when we were attacked 
in the open and could shoot back with a clean conscience 
and the blessing of God, I felt happy to kill. . . .” 

“ There you hear it — you hear the voice of Fascism,” 
cried Max in a high-pitched voice almost breaking into a 
crow. 

“ And you ? ” Dina asked suddenly, leaning across the 
table and breathing into Max’s face. “ And you, clever one ? 
What do you propose to do ? Sing the Red Flag, clever 
one ? ” 

Max flinched back as if her breath had singed his face. 
It occurred to me that Dina, made impotent for love, had, 
perhaps alone among us, retained the chastity of hatred. 
. Max must have felt something similar, for he grew pale in 
the furrows round his nose. 

“ If you still have the sense to listen,” he said with 
surprising restraint, “ I can tell you my idea of what to do. 
We have to win over the Arabs, whether you like it or not. 
You can call me any name you like and play anthems into 
my ear and dangle banners under my nose, you won’t deter 
me from my creed. Proletarians of the world, the poor and 
humble of this world, unite. This is as sacred to me as the 
Ten Commandments or the Sermon on the Mount. The 



MORE DAYS 


157 

Arabs are the poor and humble and we are the poor and 
humble. There is no other way. This is my creed and I 
won’t sell my creed for a mess of chauvinist pottage. . . 

His big tapir-nose quivered, and his eyes with the con- 
stantly inflamed lids quivered too. I liked and hated him 
in the same breath. So I said : 

44 You should not have brought in that mess of pottage. 
It’s a tricky parable — a boomerang.” 

44 What do you mean ? ” said Max, blinking. 

4 4 Our ancestor, name of J acob , got his blessing and the Land 
with it by cunning and crookedness. It’s a disgusting story. 
He swindled the guileless Esau ; he helped himself, so God 
helped him toe. Had he been more scrupulous in the choice 
of his method, we wouldn’t have got the Land — it would 
have fallen to the fur-skinned hunter of the deserts. ...” 

44 Oh, shut up,” said Max. 

44 You shut up,” I shouted. 44 You with your world- 
redeeming pacifist phrases. What if the Arabs won’t be 
redeemed by you ? They don’t want your money, nor your 
hospitals, nor your Trade Unions.” 

44 It’s only the influence of the Effendis — the landowners 
and the priests,” said Max. 44 They are frightened of losing 
their privileges. But once the people understand that we are 
coming as their real friends ...” 

44 Once,” said Dina. 44 Once, you clever one. Are you 
going to wait outside for that once ? How long, clever one ? 
How long are you going to wait, a hundred years or a 
thousand, tell me ? ” 

44 Nobody talks of waiting,” said Max, who was visibly 
frightened of Dina. 44 I never said that. I only said that 
we have to meet them half-way in a spirit of goodwill and 
understanding.” 

44 But they don’t want to meet you, you blind idiot,” I 
shouted. 44 They hate you because you are a stranger and 
because the priests told them to hate you and because they 
believe the priests and are illiterate and live in the thirteenth 
century and haven’t read your Marx. So what do you do ? 
You talk of goodwill and understanding, but in fact you 



158 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

elbow your way in, whether they like it or not. That’s what 
you do, you bloody hypocrite.” 

“ I can’t argue if you yell at the top of your voice,” 
said Max. 

“ Why don’t you shout back ? ” said Dina. “ Why don’t 
you shout, clever one ? It’s because you don’t shout that 
you will always be the loser.” 

“ Really,” said Reuben. “ This is a bit unfair. A 
shouting match of two against one. . . 

“ Damn your fairness and your ideologies and all your 
Jewish bla-bla-bla,” I said. 

“ That’s a new one,” said Ellen. “ Joseph has become 
an anti-semite.” 

At that moment the steam-roller got at last into action. 
“ This is not a discussion but a spiral nebula,” puffed Moshe. 
“ It is heated, vaporous, and has no beginning and no end. 
If I understood rightly Joseph has just discovered that the 
Government of Mr. Chamberlain would like to get rid of us. 
We know that. We also know that they can’t. We have 
become too strong. We are no longer a promise on a piece 
of paper, but half a million men, one third of the country’s 
population and more than two thirds of its economy. They 
let us down when the Arabs started shooting. We have shot 
it out with the Arabs and have proved that we are a match 
for them. We know our strength and have no need to get 
hysterical. We have built up what we have acre by acre and 
cow by cow. I for one know what my job is : to buy another 
acre and another cow. Good night.” 

Thus things were patched up — for the time being at 
least — and as there was no point in going on with the 
argument we all went to bed. 

Shabbath 

The early rains have started in earnest, and with them the 
second worst torture after the heat : botz , the mud. Next 
year, if we have the money, we shall build concrete pathways 
across the settlement ; this winter we shall still have to live 
as marsh-dwellers. 



MORE DAYS 


159 

If it were only a question of wading out to work and 
back home, that would be a trifle. The trouble is that our 
billets and living conveniences are scattered over an area of 
five acres. The communal showers and w.c.s are at a 
distance of 120 yards from the hut in which my room is ; 
the Dining Hall is 80 yards away, the Reading Room 100, 
the Secretariat 150 in another direction. Thus all the 
routine functions of life become transformed into amphibious 
expeditions through the rain-beaten swamp, each necessi- 
tating a change from outdoor gumboots into indoor shoes 
and back, and the tedious paraphernalia of scraping, stamp- 
ing and brushing one’s footwear all day. 

It is of course all a question of money. If we had enough 
money for proper sanitation, we could at least have running 
water and a w.c. for each living-hut. But this luxury not 
even the oldest and wealthiest Communes are so far able to 
afford. “ The children first, then the cattle, then the 
workers. ...” However, the first two concrete living-huts 
and three further blockhouses are nearing completion, and 
in a month’s time everybody, including the youth-group, 
will have a roof over his head and the tents will be stored 
away for the next batch of newcomers. 

The greatest plague during the rainy season is to have 
one’s tummy upset — and it is a frequent one. To wade at 
night through the rain and gale and mud to the lavatory, 
possibly three or four times, is much worse than an Arab 
raid. But for these heroic achievements there are no laurels. 

There is a water music by Haendel and anAlpensymphonie 
by Strauss ; I wish Mendl would compose the Symphony 
of the Mud. It would have to be mainly written for double- 
bass — a slow, heavy, thumping, thudding, squelching, 
belching, squashing, splashing, atonal cacophony, to the 
accompaniment of the drumming of the rain on the roofs. 

Sunday 

The Arab unrest is petering out. Peter, leader of the 
Haganah in Chanita, our most exposed settlement on the 



160 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Syrian border, visited us yesterday. He had a long hush- 
hush talk with Reuben, presumably about illegal arms. Later 
in the dining-hut he told us more stories about Wingate, 
who lived in Chanita for some time last summer ; he was 
training them in offensive guerrilla-warfare and led them in 
various actions. They all worship him, even Peter who is a 
dry and cautious kind of fellow. Apparently he has the habit 
of working stark naked in his room, speaks little, has a laconic 
sense of humour, a romantic penchant for Hebrew History 
and seems to lack the faculties of fear and fatigue. Once 
he remarked to Peter : “ You chaps learn more in a week 
than a Tommy in a month ; but you can talk more in a day 
than he talks in a year. ...” 

That’s all very well, but Wingate is an exception. He 
can’t change the Government’s policy, which is to accept 
our help against the Arabs and at the same time to prepare 
our Munich. And how indignant they are when the victim 
protests before having his throat cut. The Czechs at least 
have the consolation of having been sacrificed to save the 
peace of Europe. But we are let down without urgent need, 
simply because betrayal has become a conditioned reflex 
with this Government. The so-called Arab rebellion was a 
bluff, in which only about fifteen hundred hill-men partici- 
pated actively. The Moslem world is split even more than 
the Christian ; Wahhabis and Iraqis hate each other more 
than German and French ; the desert tribes are busy with 
raids and blood feuds ; the danger of a Moslem Holy War 
is about as real as the noble Sheikh of the movies. Our 
neighbours in the country are not even Arabs, but the 
descendants of Canaanites, Jebusites, Philistines, Crusaders, 
and Turks, with a good deal of Jewish blood. For all that 
they are charming people, naive, cunning, quarrelsome, 
good-natured and cruel. The contradictions in their char- 
acter are those of backward children : greed and generosity, 
cringing and pride, corruption and chivalry. 

Of course they don’t like us. They are slum-children in 
possession of a vast playground where they wallow happily 
in the dust. In comes another bunch of children who have 



MORE DAYS 


161 

nowhere to play and start cleaning up the place and building 
tents and lavatories with a horrible burst of efficiency. 
“ Get out from here,” they cry, “ we don’t want you.” — 
“ But there is plenty of room,” says the clever lot, “ and 
we’ve got permission to share it, and after we’ve improved 
it the place will be much nicer for you too.” — “ Get out, 
get out,” they cry, having already pinched some of the new- 
comers’ tools and toys ; “ get out, we don’t want you. 
This is our place and we like it as it is.” 

They are a relic of the middle ages. They have no con- 
ception of nationhood and no sense of discipline : they are 
good rioters and bad fighters, otherwise none of our isolated 
settlements could have survived. As a political factor they 
have been negligible since the days of the Kalifs, except 
for their nuisance value. If treated with authority, they 
keep quiet ; if encouraged, they make an infernal nuisance 
of themselves. The policy of the people who run the show 
here is to encourage them, so as to have an excuse to get 
rid of us. Two years ago when things began to stink to 
heaven they sent out a Royal Commission to investigate 
matters. “ If one thing stands out clear from the record of 
the Mandatory Administration,” says the Commission’s 
report, “ it is the leniency with which Arab political agitation, 
even when carried to the point of violence and murder, has 
been treated.” If a cautiously understated official report 
goes as far as this, one can imagine how far our Hendersons 
have gone in their game. . . . 

Oh, if at least I could hate as Simeon does ! But after 
all I am half English myself. Spoiled and pampered by the 
safety of our island, uninvaded for a millennium while other 
countries served as battlefields, we could afford to muddle 
and bungle through the ages and develop the mystic belief 
that our bungling is some higher God-inspired wisdom. 
We will plunge ourselves and the rest of the world into a 
disaster worse than anything in history ; and when we 
scramble out of it we will make humorous remarks about 
our own stupidity — blissfully unaware that, though we pay 



162 thieves in the night 

for our own mistakes, we shall never be able to pay for the 
horrors into which we have dragged the others, who are dead 
and buried and unable to share the joke. 

Tuesday 

More rain and more botz. It is not so much the dirt and 
bother which depresses one, but the sheer weight on one’s 
boots. It drags you down, depriving you of all levity, makes 
you weary and earthbound. Stamping through the heavy 
mud I almost feel myself transformed, by force of mimicry, 
into a clumsy, dripping, melting figure of clay. 

Thursday 

Two new matches. Gaby has won the competition for 
the Egyptian (if he was ever aware of Sarah competing). 
They are shamelessly happy, his eyes bulging and hers 
melting. At least with them the oppressed territories of the 
flesh have attained full sovereign rights. She calls him 
“ Ham ” which in Hebrew means “ hot ”, but could also 
signify Noah’s second son from whom the Egyptians are 
descended, or else be understood in English as pointing to 
his hind parts. The other couple are Max and that very 
fat new girl from Rumania. Perhaps his sleeping with this 
gentle eiderdown will mollify his world-redeeming zeal. 
Both couples are going to move into the new hut which will 
be ready by next Shabbath ; so I shall get rid of Max and 
have my room alone for the time being — though Ellen 
walks about with tight lips and hardly looks at me. 

Poor Sarah is even worse off. Her chastity seems to have 
a corroding effect on her like a slow-acting acid. The 
bachelors of both sexes are a problem so far unsolved in the 
Communes. We have eleven of them. Those who have not 
become matched after a year or two become sexually allergic 
towards one another ; the intimacy of life in the smaller 
Communes acts as a gradually materialising incest-barrier. 
As long as new grafts are still due, there is hope for them ; 
once we have reached our full establishment there will be 
little hope left. Then some will resign themselves, some will 



MORE DAYS 


163 

break down and leave us — and probably come back after a 
year or so, defeated by their loneliness in the world outside 
for which they have ceased to be fit. 

There is also the expedient of a year’s leave. It works 
sometimes ; but it can only be granted to one or two at a 
time, and people are reluctant to apply for it : partly because 
of a feeling of obviousness and ridicule attached to such a 
bridal quest, and partly because it has something of the 
pathos of the last chance about it, and they are scared of 
returning alone and defeated. 

Sunday 

I had hoped to enjoy a peaceful Shabbath afternoon with 
Pepys ; instead, I had a two-hours talk with Reuben, which 
led to momentous consequences. Subject : myself (Joseph 
and his Brethren, or the Individual and the Community). 

It was Reuben who provoked it. He came to my room 
and, with signs of mild embarrassment and a semi-official air, 
suggested a walk. I knew at once that something was up. 
Before, I had not fully realised how far I had worked myself 
into a crisis, and even less had I known that the others had 
noticed it. One is always apt to forget that the Commune 
has most sensitive antennae ; taken one by one we are 
perhaps not very observant, but there is a kind of collective 
intuition operating as in an insect state. 

The rain had stopped since the early morning and though 
the settlement was still a muddy mess, the slopes on the side 
of the wadi were already drying. Reuben suggested we 
should walk down into the wadi and then up the hill to the 
west to see how our new vines were getting on. So I put 
Pepys on the shelf and off we went. We passed the Tower 
and the Children’s House ; as always on Shabbath the chil- 
dren were all in their parents’ rooms and the house was 
empty and still. The doors were open, showing the deserted 
beds and cots ; at the end of the passage Dina sat all by 
herself on a stool, pretending to read. It looked as if she 
wanted to prove that she was still in charge of the house 
and of the children who were not hers. The white house 



164 thieves in the night 

stood still and dead in the afternoon sun, submerged in the 
drowsy peace of the Shabbath, and strangely oppressive. As 
we passed, Dina looked up with a pathetically cheerful 
smile ; she seemed to wait for an invitation to join us. 
Reuben nodded to her but said nothing, so I couldn’t ask 
her either. “ Reuben is taking me for a walk,” I said to her, 
“ and afterwards I am going to be thrown into the well. ,, 
I saw on her face that she had guessed what it was about. 
We walked on without speaking and Reuben’s silence told 
me that he in turn had understood why Dina was sitting 
alone in the empty Children’s House. 

We all know too much about each other. 

Sometimes the air is overcharged like certain regions of 
the ether where too many transmitters operate on the same 
wavelength. 

When we had passed the fence I said : “ Well, let’s have 
it out. What is it about — Ellen, or my fascist tendencies, 
or my general cynicism ? ” 

Reuben took his time, walking steadily down the slope. 
At last he said : “ It’s about your attitude to the com- 
munity in general. Everybody here has his problems and 
tries to simplify them. With you one sometimes gets the 
impression that you are deliberately complicating them.” 

“ By what ? By reading the newspapers ? Or by re- 
fusing to live with a girl whom I don’t love ? ” 

Reuben paused again. “ It is distasteful to me to meddle 
in your private affairs,” he said. “ But Ellen is in rather a 
bad way, and if things have gone as far as to upset the inner 
balance of a comrade and even her capacity for work, they 
cease to be private and become a concern of the whole 
community.” 

“ Oh, God,” I said. “ Oh, Moses our rabbi.” 

Reuben kept steadily pacing down the slope. I would 
have hated him had I not known how much he himself hated 
the things he had to say. 

“ To cut a long story short,” I said, “ you can’t force me 
against my will to live with Ellen. There are limits to the 
community’s claims on its members.” 



MORE DAYS 


165 

“ If you were a Moslem,” said Reuben, 44 you would 
regard it as natural that the community had the right to force 
you to marry a girl, or be stabbed by her brother with a 
dagger. If you lived in a town, you would also take it for 
granted that sexual relations entail certain responsibilities. 
It is a common mistake of most people to accept the limita- 
tions imposed upon them by traditionalist societies as matters 
of course, but to regard any interference on the part of a 
socialist society as intolerable.” 

44 But of course,” I said. 44 The whole point in a socialist 
society is to get rid of those traditional limitations and to 
reduce interference to a minimum.” 

44 Quite,” said Reuben. 44 The question is how you 
define that minimum. I believe that mutual respect for each 
other’s feelings should be included in the definition.” 

44 But what if there is incompatibility between those 
feelings ? ” 

44 Then there must be an adjustment imposed by Society 
which, to do a great right, must do a little wrong.” 

44 And the 4 little wrong ’ in my case would be an imposed 
union which I detest ? ” 

44 Either a stable union — or, if your detestation of it is 
really so strong and not simply egotism and emotional 
cowardice — then you should give up Ellen altogether.” 

44 But I need her — and she needs me. And it all went 
quite well for almost six months.” 

44 And after six months Ellen is beginning to feel the 
one-sidedness of your needs unsatisfactory and degrading.” 

44 But, Reuben,” I moaned, 44 when will you all learn to 
understand that bodily relationships exist in their own right, 
and are neither more nor less degrading than intellectual 
ones ? Is it degrading for my tennis partner if I don’t play 
chess with him ? To discuss politics in a frivolous Small- 
talk manner is as obscene and shocking to me as a petting 
party with a half-virgin. But two people who give each 
other bodily satisfaction have a clean and healthy relation, 
which should be sufficient in itself.” 

44 1 don’t agree with you,” Reuben said. 44 1 don’t believe 



166 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

that sex can be isolated from the rest. But the point is not 
what you or I believe, but what Ellen feels. And she feels 
about it so strongly (here he was looking down at his feet) 
that she wants to bring the matter up in public at the next 
meeting.” 

“ Oh, God Almighty,” I said. 

“ Moshe and I tried to dissuade her, but we didn’t 
succeed.” 

“ I thought,” I said miserably, “ that we had got over that 
period of adolescent exhibitionism years ago.” 

“ Well, there you are,” Reuben said sullenly. 

Despite my feeling of wretchedness I began suddenly to 
laugh. I had detected in Reuben’s attitude a shamefaced 
masculine sympathy and solidarity, quite incompatible 
with his convictions and the part he had to play. At the 
same time memories came back to me of our early days, and 
our comically embarrassing public confessions. . . . 

“ What’s the matter with you ? ” asked Reuben. 

“ Do you remember,” I said, “ the time when Dasha 
solemnly confessed at a meeting that she was a vain, egotistic 
petty-bourgeois because she was afraid of getting fat ? ” 

Reuben smiled. The afternoon sun was nice and hot, and 
we sat down on stones on the slope. 

“ And Max,” I went on, “ confessing that he was unable 
to rid himself of an 4 irrational and antisocial ’ dislike of 
me, and asking the comrades to help him to get over it ? 
And Sarah lecturing us on the virtues of chastity as a means 
of sublimating biological into social impulses ? And the dis- 
cussions about whether the smokers should give up smoking 
because the pleasure thus derived gave them a hedonistic 
advantage over the non-smokers ? . . .” 

“ It was youthful nonsense,” said Reuben, “ and we soon 
stopped it.” 

He threw a pebble at a vulture perching at a few steps 
from us, which rose flapping its heavy wings and emitting a 
sharp, protesting cry. 

“ Look, Joseph,” he said, “ we have been together almost 
six years. We were young fools when we came. Those 



MORE DAYS 


167 

confessions and sharings were the effusions of half-baked 
adolescents under the spell of the Essenes and the socialist 
mystics of Galizia. But now we have grown up, and if a 
mature comrade like Ellen feels driven to appeal to the whole 
community it is a quite different and serious matter.” 

“ So there we are back again where we started,” I said. 
“ Exactly how serious is it, Reuben ? You don’t mean to say 
that there will be a motion to expel me? . . 

Reuben kept on throwing pebbles though there were no 
more vultures about. As his silence became more pro- 
longed, I felt my throat going dry. I had at last understood 
the danger in which I was and felt the familiar pressure of 
fear in my heart and bladder. I had seen this kind of panic 
on a negro’s face in a film, who was going to be lynched by 
a mob — a man accused of a crime he hadn’t committed and 
who suddenly understands that the judges refuse to believe 
in his innocence. All he did was to cry No ! No ! with a 
white-lipped mouth torn wide open like a gasping carp’s, and 
knowing already that it was going to be Yes ! Yes !, solemnly, 
fatally, like in an irrevocable dream. 

“ So they are going to lynch me ? ” I said. 

Reuben shrugged and kept throwing his pebbles with a 
distracted precision. A swarm of starlings circled over us 
and the sensation of the dream grew stronger. There were 
the hills before us, unchanged, and they would look just as 
still and unconcerned when they cast me out and I would 
have to go. In the declining sun they had begun to light 
up in a violet glow. It is a colour between silver and lilac, 
peculiar to our hills. Though barren, there is nothing 
rugged about them ; they are soft and wavy, a great tide of 
undulating earth slumbered into immobility ; a solid sea of 
silver limestone and terra rossa which combine into that 
unique, pale hue. They have an erotic fascination for people, 
and after the first showers in autumn when they begin to 
cover themselves with green fluff I sometimes dream at 
night that I lie on my belly and bite into the live throbbing 
flesh of the earth, sucking the milk of Galilee. 

“ So I am going to be lynched ? ” I repeated. 



168 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Reuben stopped throwing pebbles, but he didn’t look 
at me. 

“ I don’t know,” he said. “ If you remain stubborn, 
things look pretty nasty. There will be talk of unsocial 
behaviour, frivolity, disrespect for the female comrades, and 
so on. They cannot, of course, force you, and I don’t think 
there is a sufficient case for expulsion. But they will all 
make unctuous speeches and then adjourn the whole thing, 
and after a while it will start again. And meanwhile the 
atmosphere will be poisoned. We have not had a scandal 
for years and everybody will enjoy it. It will appeal to the 
scavenger-instinct in all of us. And you will lose your temper 
as usual and provoke them even more. There is already a 
lot of feeling because of the sympathies you expressed for 
Bauman’s dissidents and terrorism, and what one may call, 
not quite unfoundedly, your Fascist inclinations. It will all 
be brought up and will make an even worse mess of it.” 

I said nothing. I thought of how I had boasted to Dina 
on the night when we occupied the Place : To approve and 
be approved of, to like and be liked — and how strangely 
she had looked at me when I had said that. I had a tugging, 
homesick feeling in my chest. Reuben went on in his 
groping voice : 

“ The trouble with you, Joseph, is that you are such a 
many-coloured bird. In a Commune the grey birds get on 
best — like myself.” 

I said nothing. It is true that Reuben is a grey bird, 
but I am terribly fond of him — perhaps just for that reason. 
And the reason for my panic was that I had suddenly lost the 
conviction that he was equally fond of me. And Moshe ? 
And Max ? And Dasha, Mendl, Simeon, Arieh, all of 
them ? In what fool’s paradise had I lived ? What is the 
tie between us all ? A kind of vague cohesion, habit, common 
interests — but is there any real friendship or intimacy ? 
We hang together like a rubber belt which has lost its 
elasticity. 

I wanted to be alone. I got up and started walking up 
the slope again. I said nothing to Reuben because I could 



MORE DAYS 


169 

not trust my voice. For a minute I thought I would go to 
see Dina, but then it occurred to me that when talking to her 
I would again forget myself and touch her hand, and she 
would withdraw it with a frightened little jerk. I stumbled 
over a stone and kicked it and went on climbing the slope as 
fast as I could until I lost my breath. Then I heard Reuben 
calling behind me and stood still. 

When he caught up with me he laid his hand on my arm 
— a rare sign of affection with Reuben. It calmed me almost 
instantly. I felt as if my blood were, after a momentary 
stop, circulating again, starting at the place on my arm 
where Reuben’s hand lay. 

“ Don’t be a fool, Joseph,” he said. “ Though, in a way, 
it serves you right. At least you know now how Ellen felt 
all this time.” 

“ Ellen ? ” I said. “ It hadn’t occurred to me.” 

“ No — it had not occurred to you, because you were too 
preoccupied with yourself.” 

“ That is not true. I pity her. It was a real wrench to 
me when the other day she started crying. Believe me, I 
have a feeling of great warmth and pity for her — but I can’t 
help her.” 

“ Pity is not the point,” said Reuben. He smiled a little, 
his dim, resigned smile. “ Your heart bleeds when she is 
there, and heals up at once when she turns her back. She is 
an object to you, not a subject. She only exists for you with 
reference to yourself. You are an emotional positivist. You 
only recognise observable phenomena of feeling. You love 
in abstractions. You are engrossed in Judaism but don’t like 
the Jews. You love the idea of mankind but not the real 
man. You have lived with us for six years and still we are 
objects to you, not subjects.” 

“ It isn’t true,” I shouted. “ I am much fonder of you 
than you are of me.” 

Reuben’s hand on my arm had gradually closed in a firm 
grip, and he was gently shaking me. 

“ That is sentimentality,” he said. “ You have emotions 
but no affections. You are fond of people as objects of 

M 



170 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

observation and as projection-screens for your own feelings. 
That is how one is fond of a horse or a dog.” 

I felt hollow and exhausted. I wrenched my arm free 
and sat down on the damp slope. Reuben remained standing 
in front of me ; I had never seen him so eloquent and 
commanding. 

“ Everybody carries with him a portion of loneliness,” 
he said. “ In a Commune more than outside. Outside, 
there is the family with its concentrated affections. Here 
there is only a diffuse, evenly distributed benevolence. It is 
not enough to satisfy people’s cravings for intimacy, par- 
ticularly not the women’s. We have to supplement it by 
lasting personal unions.” 

“ And so back to the holy family from which we thought 
we had broken away.” 

“ Don’t be absurd and unfair. We have liberated the 
child from parental tyranny, and the parents from economic 
tyranny. Don’t you think that is quite a lot ? ” 

“ There remains the tyranny of monogamousness.” 

“ Look,” said Reuben, for the first time showing signs of 
impatience. “ The idea of the Commune is to find a solution 
for pressing national and social problems. Do you not think 
it would be taking on rather too much if we tried to solve the 
biological and sexual problem as well ? The difference be- 
tween Utopia and a working concern is to know one’s 
limits.” 

I thought, and not for the first time during our argument, 
of Esther, Reuben’s wife, a mousy, insipid little creature who, 
shortly expecting her first baby, looks like nothing but an 
enormous drum-belly with the rest attached to it as mere 
accessories. I have never been able to find out what 
Reuben’s feelings towards her were. 

“ All right,” I said. “ We have argued enough. What 
do you expect me to do ? ” 

“ To conform to the unwritten law of the community — 
without which it could not exist, would, in fact, disintegrate 
within a year or so. To make the one final adjustment — or 
sacrifice, if you want to dramatise it. But what it all practi- 



MORE DAYS 


171 

cally amounts to is that you share a room with Ellen instead 
of with Mendl and possibly the Dr. Phil, as a third. For, 
as you know, when the next graft arrives we shall have to 
put three bachelors into one room.” 

I had to grin. “ If this isn’t blackmail . , .” 

“ I haven’t invented the Dr. Phil.,” said Reuben. “ And 
the bachelors have to live together.” 

“ But even if I agreed, it would be a dreadful humiliation 
for Ellen that I should live with her because of outward 
pressure.” 

“ Not if you switch on your proverbial charm and explain 
everything away as a misunderstanding. . . He smiled. 
“ Besides, even sensitive women are surprisingly thick- 
skinned when it is a question of getting themselves married.” 

“ You are the bloodiest Jesuit I have ever seen,” I said. 

“ I am merely trying to discharge my duties as the elected 
one-year Secretary of the Commune,” he said, with a quite 
serious face. 

“ And the alternative, if I refuse, is that I have to 
leave ? ” 

He looked down at me with his faint smile. 

“ I never for a moment expected that you would choose 
it. After all, Joseph, you are one of our ancients.” 

I said nothing, but I knew that I had given in already. 
After the panic of a moment ago everything else was sheer 
relief — the relief of the candidate for lynching who hears 
his sentence commuted to life imprisonment. Life with 
Ellen even seemed suddenly to have its attractions — a nice, 
cosy prison-cell with books to read and plenty of exercise in 
the courtyard. . . . 

This was the moment when Reuben, the communal 
Jesuit, came out with his surprise. 

“ Well, I take it that we are agreed,” he said lightly. 
“ Now there is another matter I wanted to discuss with you. 
The next graft is due in a fortnight. The Colonisation De- 
partment is speeding up the whole plan of our expansion. 
That means a lot of travelling about for the treasurer to 
negotiate loans, buy new machinery and building material, 



172 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

and so on. Moshe is already unable to cope with both the 
outside and the local work. And now with this rush, and 
all our planning being upset, we shall need him here all 
the time. That means that we have to elect a new member 
of the Secretariat for outside work, who will have to spend 
five days a week in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. Moshe and 
I have decided to propose that you should be elected for 
this job at the monthly meeting next week. . . 

I gasped. “ What is this — a bribe ? ” 

“ Think for yourself whether you can suggest anybody 
better qualified for the job. You are the best solution for our 
needs — and it is the best solution for yours.” 

Thus ended this memorable conversation. I have been 
cast into the well and pulled out again, and on Friday week 
I shall probably be appointed to the new job — as Joseph 
the Provider. Meanwhile I have to give a series of lectures 
to the Dr. Phil., called Introduction into the Elements of the 
Theory and Practice of Applied Shoe-making, with a view 
to turning him into my temporary deputy. 

Marriage as a week-end institution won’t be too bad either. 
I am almost looking forward to it ; maybe one could do 
something about the National Birthrate. And I shall be in 
towns again and walk the solid pavements of Sodom and 
Gomorrah. 

However, I am still too excited to see the consequences of 
it all. I had under-estimated Reuben, God bless him. I 
wish every Commune had a Jesuit like him. Some have in 
fact, or almost ; — but then, what other place can stand 
comparison with Ezra’s Tower ? . . . 

Wednesday 

We had a break of a few sunny days, and yesterday during 
the lunch hour I climbed up the hill on the other side of the 
wadi to pay a visit to the Ancestor’s Cave. 

The Ancestor’s Cave was discovered six months ago by 
Arieh the shepherd. The whole hill above the new vine- 
yard is riddled with caves, about half a dozen of which served 



MORE DAYS 


173 

as burial chambers in Byzantine days. They have all been 
plundered countless times and even the bones have been 
scattered. The relatively best preserved is the one Arieh has 
found, the cave of Joshua the Ancestor. But his skull is 
missing ; perhaps some Arab terrorist has pinched it to have 
one Hebrew less to cope with in the civil war after the 
Resurrection. They feel very strongly about this. To pre- 
pare for the coming campaign they have already buried four 
hundred Moslem heroes with their swords beneath the 
south-east corner of the Haram el Sheriff, whose task it will 
be to defend the Mosque of Omar against a post-apocalyptic 
attack from the Hebrew cemetery in the Valley of Josaphat. 

Anyway, we like the idea of having the Ancestor’s Cave, 
although it only contains a headless skeleton and the in- 
scription with his name, and is an altogether modest affair 
compared to the antiquities discovered in other Communes 
— such as the Byzantine mosaic floor of the ancient syna- 
gogue in Beth Alpha, with its lovely picture of Abraham 
sacrificing Isaac, and various arabesques which look like 
draughts-boards. There is a story that when the Hebrew 
religion was made illegal after Bar Kochba’s revolt, the be- 
lievers would assemble in the synagogue and, when the 
watchposts signalled the approach of soldiers, would all 
squat down to play draughts. 

I found Arieh with his sheep near the Ancestor’s Cave ; 
he was lying as usual on his back, his fringed cartwheel-hat 
pulled over his face. Arieh is perhaps the only one of us 
capable of relaxing by lying on his back in the open air. 
When I go for a walk with Ellen or Dina or Moshe and we 
stop for a rest, they either squat on their haunches with knees 
pulled up, or lie on their stomachs kicking the earth with 
their toes ; and always after a minute or two they become 
fidgety and change position. Living on the land has washed 
a good deal of restlessness out of our blood, but there is still 
something atavistic in us constantly on the alert. Our 
collective unconscious must be crowded with the hosts and 
ghosts of Legionaries, Inquisitors, Crusaders, Landsknechts, 
and Cossacks. But our Tarzans, I believe, have got rid of 



174 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

them. Theirs the dreamless aseptic sleep without the fear 
and the vision — chevaliers sans peur et sans rives. 

Arieh is an exception ; but then Arieh is simple-minded 
— to put it mildly. I am fond of him, and I think it is 
reassuring to have in at least one Commune a shepherd who 
is not an ex-professor of semantics but a moron. 

I couldn’t make out whether he was asleep or not. Guri, 
our giant sheep-dog, lay with his fore-paws across Arieh’s 
chest. As I came closer he began to growl. Obviously Guri 
has taken over the element of suspicion from his master’s 
subconscious. For though Guri is collective property, he 
regards Arieh as his real master, while for the rest of us he 
shows a kind of friendly condescension. We are all jealous 
of Guri and I wonder whether Sarah won’t one day take the 
matter up in the General Assembly. 

As Arieh did not stir, I decided that he was asleep and 
continued up the slope to the caves. I found the one I was 
looking for, and lowered myself through the narrow entrance- 
hole into the vestibule of the burial chambers. It was 
muddy and smelt of damp and urine. There are three small 
chambers opening from the vestibule — no more than niches 
hewn into the rock, each the size of a small coffin. But of 
course the ancestors were buried without coffins, just wrapped 
in a sheet and pushed into their niche. In the first chamber 
there are a few scattered bones, the others are empty except 
for the damp sand on the bottom of the niche. There is 
always a candle-stump in the first chamber ; I lit it and 
went down the three slippery steps into the lower passage, 
careful not to bang my head against the rock. The lower 
vestibule contains three more niches, and the centre one is 
headless Joshua’s. Engraved by a clumsy, childish hand into 
the hard lime-rock over the narrow entrance of the niche are 
the four letters yod> shin , vaf and a' yin : Joshua or Jeshu 
or Jesu. I looked at the bones embedded in the damp sand 
of the niche and tried unsuccessfully to work up some 
emotion ; but I just couldn’t believe that there ever was 
warm flesh round those pathetic bones, and strange clothes 
round the flesh, and ideas in the missing head. Least of all 



MORE DAYS 


175 

could I imagine what he may have looked like. However, 
according to the laws of probability, there must be a fraction 
in me which is directly descended from him. Inside my 
testicles there are some complicated but stable groups of 
molecules which were handed down to me from him with 
their pattern unchanged ; and maybe some day I shall pass 
them on to Ellen and so down the chain. It is as if a long, 
long pipeline were laid out not in space but in time, and 
at every time-mile or so there is a tap attached to a pair of 
loins. Now and then the tap opens and the ancient stream 
mixes with other streams in other pipes. An elaborate 
system of irrigation, like our vegetable garden’s, expanded 
over the dry crust of the globe. Well, well. . . . 

Come to think of it, there are not even so many taps 
between old Joshua and myself : the length of the pipe is 
about seventeen centuries which equal no more than fifty-one 
generations. In other words, old Joshua was only about 
the twenty-sixth grandfather of my grandfather. Quite 
likely he was one of Bar Kochba’s underground rebel army 
which fought the Legionaries in these same hills of Galilee, 
and his wife and kin were crucified or put to the sword, and 
his missing head, once bearded and waited and furrowed by 
yellow wrinkles, was buzzing with Things to Forget. 

I climbed out of the cave, and who should be waiting for 
me outside the hole but Guri, whining with anxiety about 
the vanishing in the bowels of the earth of the one thirty- 
sixth fraction of his collective proprietor. As my head 
emerged from the hole he was howling with joy, and as I 
needed both hands to climb out of the hole he profited from 
the occasion to wash my face all over with his slobbering 
tongue. I was of course delighted ; there is nothing more 
flattering than the attentions of a dog with a strong person- 
ality. People like you for this or that quality, but dogs pay 
homage to the very Ding an sich in you. 

While walking down the slope I kept my eyes on the 
ground, looking for coins and surface-pottery. Coins abound 
here at this time of the year — the autumn rain washes them 



176 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

out of the soil of the decayed terraces. The other day the 
Dr. Phil, found a “ Judaea capta ” which is a rarity. He 
would. I only found some Constantines and Jupiter 
Ammons. 

When Guri and I got back to Arieh, he was sitting up and 
smoking a cigarette with his great pal Walid, the Arab 
shepherd from Kfar Tabiyeh. Guri, who has strong racial 
prejudices, growled at Walid, but at a word from Arieh 
flopped his ears back and settled down in the classical 
Sphinx-pose, watching us with his tongue hanging out. 

I shook hands with Arieh and Walid, and sat down with 
them for a cigarette. Walid is a quiet and very polite boy, 
so I went through the regulation question-and-answer 
ceremony. 

“ How are you, ya Walid ? ” 

“ I am well, thank God.” 

“ So you are well, ya Walid ? ” 

“ I am very well, thank God.” 

“ And your father is well too ? ” 

“ He is very well, thank God.” 

“ I am glad your father is well, ya Walid.” 

“ My father is well, thank God.” 

“ And how is your older brother, ya Walid ? ” 

And so on through the two younger brothers and the 
horse and the two mules and the cattle and the flock. The 
answer is always that all is well, even if the whole family is 
dying and the flock decimated by foot-and-mouth disease. 
It is a soothing, gentle ritual, of which the British lovely-day 
game is but a crude and simplified variation. When we got 
through with it, Walid, who had finished his cigarette and 
was chewing a halm of grass, said : 

“ I have just remarked to your friend that your young 
trees look very beautiful.” 

“ Walid likes trees,” Arieh said languidly, by way of 
explanation. 

“ I think trees are beautiful,” said Walid. 

“ Why don’t you plant some in your village ? ” I asked. 

u Tzz ! ” said Walid, tossing his head up as a sign of 



MORE DAYS 


177 


violent negation. “ That is impossible.” 

“ Why is it impossible ? ” 

“ Tzz ! The trees would not last.” 

“ Why would they not last ? ” 

“You have a quarrel with your neighbour and he cuts 
your trees down.” 

“ That is very bad,” I said. “ Can you do nothing 
about it ? ” 

“ Tzz ! ” he said. “ No. We can’t grow trees.” 

We were quiet for a while, and just sat and watched the 
sheep and the clouds. Arieh offered cigarettes, but he had 
only two left, so he broke one into halves and he and I shared 
it. Walid twice politely refused to take the cigarette and 
accepted it the third time. After a while he said : 

“ You are very poor.” 

“ Not very,” I said. “ And we have only just started.” 

“ You have tractors and electricity but you have no 
cigarettes.” 

“ We put all our money into tractors and machines, and 
later we shall be rich.” 

“ No,” he said. “ When you have more money you will 
buy more tractors.” 

For some reason this irritated me, and I said to tease him : 

“ Well, you have no tractors and no cigarettes either.” 

“ But I am free,” Walid said. “ And you live like in 
prison.” 

“ Walid thinks we work too hard,” Arieh explained. 

“ Nobody tells us how much we are to work,” I said. 
“ We do it because we like it.” 

“ You start planting trees and then you have to go on 
tending them. You always start something new and then 
you have to finish it, and when it is finished you have to 
start again something new. You are like prisoners. I am 
free. If I like I can go to-morrow to Egypt or to America 
or to England.” 

“ You need money for that,” Arieh remarked philo- 
sophically. 

“ Ma lesh — that doesn’t matter,” said Walid. “ I can 



178 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

go wherever I like. Egypt or America or India. I am free 
and you are prisoners.” 

“ Everybody who has set himself a task becomes a 
prisoner,” I said. “ But that doesn’t matter. Ma lesh ” 

“ Ma lesh” Walid agreed. 

“ Ma lesh” said Arieh, lying over on his back and pulling 
his fringed hat over his eyes. . . . 

Thursday 

To-night I told Dina that I am going to marry Ellen. 
She said that she had expected it and made no further com- 
ment. We were standing together on the platform of the 
Tower, after dark. 

We stood for perhaps five minutes in silence. Several 
times I wanted to speak, but each time I felt my voice thicken 
in my throat, and gave it up. I knew that we were both 
thinking of the same scene : that first morning when she had 
slept on my arm in the first-aid tent and we had climbed up 
the Tower to watch the sun rise over the hills. 

Suddenly I had the wild idea that perhaps Dina’s trouble 
was just fuss and hypochondria, and that by taking her by 
surprise I could break down the barrier. I silently counted 
ten to myself and then turned towards her and grabbed 
her by the shoulders with a hard grip. She did not shrink 
back, it was almost as if she had expected it ; in fact I am 
convinced that she had expected it. She did not resist as 
I drew her towards me, but her body grew taut and un- 
yielding ; and she trembled so violently that I could hear 
the faint grinding noise of her teeth as she locked her jaws 
to prevent herself from crying out. By then I was terrified 
but I wanted to go through with it and I knew that Dina 
wanted me to go through with it, in the same desperate 
hope. Against her will her rigid body strained away from 
me ; and at the second when I pressed my mouth against 
her tight dry lips, hardened by the clenched teeth behind 
them, she flung me away with the uncontrollable violence 
of an explosion. While we both stood panting on the dark 
platform, she managed to say in a kind of hiss : “ Sorry, 



MORE DAYS 


179 

Joseph — please go away — quick ” ; and before I could 
make up my mind she was sick over the parapet. I did not 
even dare to hold her head. 

After a while she got better and we climbed down the 
ladder. Again I did not dare to help her. In the faint light 
which came through the open door of the dining-hut she 
said good-night, contriving a kind of smile. 

I walked out into the fields and threw myself down on the 
soft dewy earth. I closed my eyes and went into a day-dream 
about what I would do to the fellows who had done this to 
Dina if I could lay my hands on them. It was the first time 
in my life that a fantasy of this kind got hold of me, and 
when I pulled myself out of it I was all sweaty in my clothes 
and trembling. But sobering up was almost unbearable, so 
I began once more to dig my nails into the damp earth which 
became transformed into the liquid eye-sockets of Dina’s 
torturer. When I sobered the second time, the attack 
was over. 

Even now, in my full senses, I would accept the oppor- 
tunity of physical revenge. This is against my reasoning 
and my convictions. But reasoning cannot satisfy either 
hunger or rut, and to-night I have learned that the thirst for 
revenge may become physiological reality. It would not help 
Dina, but it would help me. 

I know a story of a Sicilian peasant who had spent five 
years in prison for the attempted murder of his wife’s seducer 
and who, the day he was released, went straight to the 
seducer’s house, killed him, and went contentedly back to 
prison for the rest of his life. The Italian Communist who 
told me the story, said that after ten years in prison the 
peasant seemed perfectly happy and knew no regret. At the 
time I could not believe this ; now I understand that under 
certain circumstances a life-sentence or the gallows may 
appear as a reasonable price to pay for regaining one’s peace 
of mind. 

The Arabs seem to know this. And some of Bauman’s 
youngsters too, like that boy Benjosef who went on singing 
the anthem until the cord choked his voice. That isn’t so 



l8o THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

easy as it sounds. The climate, or the contact with this earth 
riddled with ancestors* caves, seems to reopen certain taps 
in the pipe which had better remain sealed. 

Now that I have written it down I have exorcised the 
headless Joshua. Articulateness is the death of instinct. 
But have I not said before that the trouble with us is that 
we have become too articulate ? . . . 

Friday 

Ran into Dina first thing in the morning outside the 
shower-baths, and walked with her to the dining-hut for 
breakfast. Her hair was still damp from the shower and 
faintly steaming in the cold morning air. The contrast of the 
fresh cold-water-gloss on her face and the blue shadows 
under her eyes made her look more attractive than ever. 
At breakfast she chattered with unforced gaiety. She seemed 
to have forgotten all about yesterday, and after the first plate 
of porridge I too felt much better. 

Anyway, yesterday has settled it : Ellen is moving into 
my room to-morrow. 

Sunday 

Simeon has been transferred from the “ infectious ” 
ward, so yesterday at last I could go and see him in the 
Hadassah Hospital in Haifa. 

With his face flat on the pillow he looked more than ever 
like a sick falcon. His black eyes fastened on me as soon as 
I entered the ward and seemed to pull and steer me on my 
way round the other beds to his side. His face is emaciated 
and so are his long, loose-fingered, nicotine-stained hands. 
The blanket on his bed was neatly tucked in and his pyjamas 
buttoned up to the neck ; there was nothing undressed 
about Simeon in bed. The blanket, bedside locker and even 
the pillow were littered with papers and newspaper cuttings. 

I sat down on a chair by the bed, and grabbed his hand 
which lay flat on the blanket. 

“ One shouldn’t touch me — I may still be infectious,” 
he said, but I could see that he was pleased. “ Well, how 



MORE DAYS 


181 

are things on our ivory tower ? ” 

“ I am to marry Ellen and to be made treasurer for out- 
side work,” I blurted out. 

“ No ! ” he exclaimed in frank and naive amazement. He 
seemed excited by my news like a schoolboy being told what 
has been going on in the class during his absence. Simeon 
did after all look more human in bed. 

“ You don’t say. . . .” He laughed, but after one or two 
chuckles started to cough. “ By God, Reuben has got his 
dialectics right. . . . But it is a good thing,” he continued. 
“ You are the best person for the job. And otherwise you 
would have quitted — sooner or later.” 

So Simeon too had noticed how much adrift I had been. 
They all seem to have noticed it — except myself. 

It was visiting hour, and each of the four patients in the 
room had one or two relatives sitting at his bedside. They 
were all absorbed in their own conversation and created a 
neutral, relaxed atmosphere in which each bed with its locker, 
chair and screen formed a little island of privacy. Simeon 
lay on his back, his eyes gazing at the ceiling. “ Tell me 
more about our ivory tower,” he said. 

“ Gaby is marrying the Egyptian and Moshe has twins — 
but this you probably know already.” 

He nodded. “ What else ? ” 

“ We bought a mare from Ein Hashofeth for twenty 
pounds.” 

“ How old ? ” 

“ Three years. Ash-coloured. Rather nice, but showing 
too much rib.” 

“ What is she going to be called ? ” 

“ Alliyahr 

He gave a short, bitter chuckle. “ Immigration,” he re- 
peated. “ Symbols, symbols and nothing behind it.” 

Am old fat nurse waddled past carrying a bedpan. Despite 
her neat uniform she looked more like the wife of a rabbi 
disguised as a nurse. 

Simeon was silent for a while, then he cleared his throat 
and asked in a casual voice : 



182 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


44 And the saplings ? ” 

“ Judith is looking after them. Since the rains they have 
grown almost an inch.” 

“ Any duds ? ” 

44 Not as far as I know.” 

4 4 The last row towards the corner of the veg-garden needs 
some extra watering.” 

44 ril tell Judith.” 

He gazed at the ceiling and gave a shrug. 44 What’s the 
difference, anyway. . . 

44 When will they let you out ? ” I asked. 

44 In about a week.” 

44 You’ll have to share a room with Mendl and the 
Dr. Phil.” 

44 1 won’t.” 

44 It will be difficult to find another arrangement. We are 
expecting a new graft in a fortnight.” 

Simeon said nothing, and after a while I asked : 

44 They’ll send you first for convalescence to Sichron ? ” 

44 I expect so.” 

44 And when will you be back home ? ” 

44 Never.” 

I stared at him and he looked at the ceiling, then slowly 
turned his head to me. 

44 It doesn’t really surprise you, does it ? ” 

My heart was thumping. 

44 Habibi ,” I said at last. 44 No. No, I won’t believe it.” 

He smiled. 44 The funny thing is, I can’t yet really make 
myself believe it either.” 

More than anything that he could have said, this con- 
vinced me that arguing was useless. Without Simeon the 
image of the Place in my mind’s eye had suddenly become 
a shade darker and greyer — like a scene on the stage with the 
lights gradually being shut off. It was perhaps even worse 
than if we lost Dina. A Commune is not simply a crowd — 
it is a pattern, a mosaic figure, and if a piece breaks loose it 
leaves a gap for ever. 

44 But why, Simeon ? ” I asked. 



MORE DAYS 183 

His smile became ironical. “ Ask yourself and you will 
find the answer.” 

I kept silent, for Simeon made me feel not only miserable, 
but guilty — just as during our last talk in the tree-nursery. 
I had avoided him ever since and, to tell the truth, his illness 
had been rather a godsend to me. But there it was now — 
and I could no longer escape it ; just as I could not escape 
that other question centred round Ellen. 

It is no good running away from things — they move 
slower and steadier, and in the end they always catch up 
with one. 

Simeon had propped himself up on his elbow, searching 
among his papers. He was very weak, and his thin neck 
with the skinny Adam’s apple trembled slightly with the 
effort. The fat nurse waddled excitedly towards us. “ I 
told you you are not allowed to sit up,” she cackled. 

44 Go to hell,” said Simeon quietly. She gaped at him 
but he went on searching among his papers, ignoring her 
completely, and after a few seconds she turned on her heel 
and walked off, with a red face, and without another word. 

44 Read these,” said Simeon, thrusting the bundle of 
newspaper cuttings into my hand and letting himself fall 
back on the pillow. The cuttings were neatly labelled and 
held together by a clip. I read : 

44 According to a statement issued by the Government of Northern 
Rhodesia , the elected members of the Legislative Council have un- 
animously opposed any immigration of Jewish Refugees . The acting 
Governor , therefore, felt unable to advise the Secretary of State that 
the matter would be proceeded with further at the present time. ...” 

“ It is stated that mass immigration into Portuguese colonies is 
strictly forbidden. ...” 

44 President Vargas of Brazil has issued a decree . . . fixing the 
annual quota of immigration at two per cent of the total number of im- 
migrants of the same nationality during the last fifty years. . . 

44 A memorandum urging the prohibition of foreign immigrants 
into Cyprus has been submitted to the Municipal Council by local 
professional corporations. . . .” 



184 thieves in the night 

“ Refugees from European countries will not be encouraged to 
emigrate to New Zealand , according to a statement made last week 
by Mr. Nash, the Minister of Finance. . . .” 

“ It is understood that the Government of South Africa is un- 
willing to contemplate any modification in the stringent provisions 
of the Aliens Act , which makes Jewish immigration virtually 
impossible . . . 

“ It is reported that the Uruguay Government has instructed 
its Consuls to refuse visas to Jews who are emigrating for racial 
or political reasons. . . 

Simeon looked at me with his bitterly hypnotic eyes. 
There was a fluid poison in them and 1 understood why the 
fat nurse had not answered back. 

“ Observe/’ he said, “ that these are cuttings taken from 
one English newspaper only, and that they all appeared 
during the last three months. I have the decrees of about 
twenty more countries on my list — decrees prohibiting 
admittance of the lepers with the yellow spot. And now 
read this. . . 

“ It is reported from reliable sources in Germany whose origin 
cannot be disclosed , that for some time experiments have been carried 
out in state orphanages for the painless physical liquidation of 
children incurably crippled , insane , or of undesirable racial heredity. 
The methods applied are phenol injections into the aorta , intra-venous 
air injections to cause thrombosis , and lethal chambers filled with 
carbon monoxide gas." 

Simeon watched me. “ It may be exaggerated,” I said 
after a while. 

“ You think so ? No you don’t. It’s the Englishman 
inside you trying to close the shutters. And now read this.” 

It was the previous day’s paper, which had not reached 
us yet in Ezra’s Tower. I read : 

“ London, December 8 . — The Marquess of Dujferin and Ava , 
Colonial Under- Secretary, appreciated the moving appeal for the 
admission to Palestine of 10,000 Jewish children whose parents had 
become victims of persecution in Germany , but pointed out that Hie 
Majesty’s Government was unable to accede as they must consider 



MORE DAYS 185 

the danger of prejudicing the Round Table Conference on Palestine 
which is shortly to assemble in the capital . 

... It was further pointed out during the debate in the House 
of Lords that the Government's decision to turn down the Palestine 
Hebrew Community's offer to receive the children was equivalent to 
robbing them of the prospect of escape." 

I handed the cuttings back. “ What are you collecting 
this stuff for ? ” 

“ I have been asked to edit a pamphlet.” 

“ By whom ? ” 

He paused, then said, looking at me with an ironic smile : 

“ By the Bauman Group — and those connected with it. 
Don’t pretend again that you are surprised.” 

“ No,” I said. Then I added : 

“ So that’s why you are going to leave us.” 

Simeon wiped the sweat from his face, unfolding a neatly- 
pressed handkerchief. 

“ Is that all your comment ? ” he said. “ I thought you 
were going to call me a fascist, a killer, an outcast and 
whatnot.” 

“ No,” I said. “ I won’t.” 

For a while none of us spoke, but all the time Simeon was 
watching me and I knew that every expression on my face 
would be stored away in his memory as if on photographic 
records. Then he said : 

“ Things are moving quickly now. In a few months or 
weeks our group will have to go underground. The 
Government will start arresting and deporting us. Then 
we will start to shoot — and believe me, we’ll do it more 
efficiently than the Arabs. We have a few technical surprises 
ready for them.” 

He spoke with the self-assurance of a man with an army 
behind him. 

“ Where will the stuff come from ? ” I asked. 

“ The arms ? We have plenty, and there is more coming.” 

“ Where from ? ” 

“ From abroad. You will hear about that in due time. 
You will hear a lot more to surprise you.” 


N 



186 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

I said nothing. Everything Simeon said sounded boastful 
and fantastic — everything except the way he said it. The 
lure was in his self-assurance. It sapped the resistance of 
my judgement. His contact always acted on me in the way 
of communicating vessels : it emptied my critical faculties 
and filled me up with faith. It was an immensely comforting 
sensation. All that was needed was to take the plunge and 
one would be rid of all doubts and filled with inner certainty 
and the boons of blind obedience? — like on the first night 
when I was shooting under Reuben’s orders. 

“. . , But the time for you has not come yet,” said 
Simeon, and I felt as if he had deliberately cut the contact. 
“ They need you at our ivory tower. Moshe is right about 
carrying on with the job as long as there is a possibility. 
When we need you we shall let you know.” 

“ I haven’t said yet that I agree,” I said. But Simeon 
merely smiled : 

“ Do you think I would have told you the things I did, 
if I didn’t know that we can trust you ? ” 

The visiting hour was drawing to its end and all over the 
ward people gathered themselves up and lingered by the beds 
in the elaborate process of leave-taking. Simeon seemed to 
shrink again to a sick man in a hospital bed dreading to be 
left alone. I felt pity for him — the pity for the strong 
which is more painful than pity for the weak. 

“ Oh, Simeon,” I said, pressing his damp yellow fingers, 
“ why can’t we stay on in our ivory tower ? You with your 
saplings and I with my old boots and Pepys. Is that too 
much to ask ? ” 

He withdrew his hand. “ Ask from whom ? ” he said 
drily. “ From God or from the British ? ” 

“ Time, please,” called the fat nurse — but she dared not 
come close to Simeon’s bed. 

“ What will you live on in the town ? ” I asked ; and 
only now did it occur to me that after altogether six years’ 
work with the Commune, Simeon was to leave us without 
a shilling or a spare shirt of his own. 

Simeon shrugged. “ I shall be a professional killer,” he 



MORE DAYS 187 

said. I couldn’t even make out whether he was joking 
or not. 

“ Time, please,” called the nurse, looking at us. 

“ Remember one thing, Joseph,” said Simeon. “ A 
phrase which you yourself once said to me. ‘ It is the deed 
which counts and not its inner shadow.’ Each of our acts 
goes on record. It is weighed on objective scales and not 
on the individual balance.” 

“ Time, please,” called the nurse, 
in the ward. 


I was the last visitor 




? 


DAYS OF WRATH 
(i939) 

“ Ireland, they say, has the honour of being the only 
country which never persecuted the Jews. Do you know 
why ? ” 

“ Why, sir ? ” Stephen asked. 

fc Because she never let them in,” Mr. Deasy said 
solemnly. 

(James Joyce, Ulysses ) 




DAYS OF WRATH (1939) 


1 

“ And the king of Babylon smote them , and slew them at Riblah 
in the land of Hamath . So Judah was carried away out of their 
land . And they burnt the house of God , and brake down the 
wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and 
destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof \ And them that had 
escaped from the sword carried he away to Babylon ; where they 
were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom 
of Persia” 

(Kings'and Chronicles) 


2 

“ Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, the Lord stirred 
up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclama- 
tion throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing , 
saying : The Lord God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms 
of the earth ; and he hath charged me to build him an house at 
Jerusalem , which is in Judah . Who is there among you of all 
his people , his God be with him, and let him go. 

“ Now these are the children of the province that went up 
out of captivity, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah . 
And they set the altar upon his bases ; for fear was upon 
them because of the people of those countries. And when 
the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord, 
they sat the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the 
Levites with cymbals, and they sang together by course in 
praising because the foundation of the house of the Lord was 
laid . But many of the priests , who were ancient men, that had 
seen the first house, wept with a loud voice ; and many shouted 
aloud for joy : so that the people could not discern the noise of 



192 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping . 

“ Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard 
that the children of the captivity huilded the temple , then they 
troubled them in building , and hired counsellors against them to 
frustrate their purpose all the days of Cyrus king of Persia , 
even until the reign of Danus king of Persia . And in the reign 
of Ahasuerus wrote they unto him an accusation against 
the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem . And in the days of 
Artaxerxes wrote Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the scribe 
and the rest of their companions a letter against Jerusalem. This 
is the copy of the letter that they sent unto Artaxerxes the king : 

“ Thy servants the men on this side of the river , and at such 
a time . Be it known unto the king, that the Jews that came up 
from thee to us are come unto Jerusalem , building the rebellious 
and the bad city , and have set up the walls thereof and joined 
the foundations. Be it known now unto the king , that , if this 
city be builded, and the walls set up again , then will they not 
pay toll , tribute , and custom , and so thou shall endamage the 
revenue of the kings. 

“ Then sent the king an answer unto Rehum the chancellor , 
and to Shimshai the scribe , and to the rest of their companions : 
Peace , and at such a time. The letter which ye sent unto us 
hath been plainly read before me. And 1 commanded , and 
search hath been made, and it is found that this city of old times 
hath made insurrection against kings , and that rebellion and 
sedition have been made therein. Give ye now commandment to 
cause these men to cease , and that this city be not builded , until 
another commandment shall be given from me. 

“ Now when the copy of king Artaxerxes y letter was read 
before Rehum , and Shimshai the scribe , and their companions , 
they went up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews , and made 
them to cease by force and power,” 


(From the Book of Ezra) 



DAYS OF WRATH 


193 


3 

The desk of the Hon. Patrick Gordon-Smith, O.B.E., 
Assistant Chief Commissioner to the Government of 
Palestine, was an ordinary polished mahogany desk such as 
one might see in any department store. As if to compensate 
him for the desk’s lack of history and tradition, the tall 
windows of the temporary Government offices in the Hospice 
of St. Paul opened on the noble sight of the wall of the Old 
City of Jerusalem, built by Soleiman the Magnificent of huge, 
ochre-coloured squared stones, some of which betrayed by 
their relief-work Roman origin and had once formed the outer 
wall of Herod’s Temple. Bending to the left in his armchair, 
the Assistant Chief Commissioner could also obtain a partial 
view of the bustling life in front of the Damascus Gate — 
a dusty and smelly but extremely attractive medley of 
donkeys, camels, and Arabs in all kinds of attire, which, 
despite the noisy cries of lemonade vendors, the roar of the 
cracked gramophone on the terrace of the near-by Arab 
coffee-house, the occasional tinkling of sheep-bells and the 
constant hooting of motor-cars, had a strangely dream-like 
quality, as if a scene from a mediaeval etching, illustrating a 
pilgrim’s tale, had come to life. It was one of the few parts 
of Jerusalem as yet unspoiled by the vulgarity of modern 
Hebrew architecture, and one to which Jews rarely ventured 
these days as the whole Arab quarter north of the Old City 
Wall was considered unsafe for them. 

The A.Ch.C. was reading with a harassed air the topmost 
document of this morning’s yellow in-tray, concerning a 
protest of the Armenian community against an alleged in- 
fringement of the status quo in the Basilica of the Nativity in 
Bethlehem, said to have been committed by Greek Orthodox 
priests by attaching the curtain of their chapel to the upper 
nail No. 1 on the pillar south-east of the left-hand set of 
steps leading to the Manger. 

It was the A.Ch.C.’s habit to read in the morning the 



194 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

papers in the non-urgent yellow tray first, before turning 
to the urgent blue and so to the top-urgent red tray. As 
the years passed, this habit had grown such firm roots that 
to adopt the opposite procedure now appeared to him as an 
eccentricity of doubtful taste. Once, when pressed for an 
explanation — though he disliked explanations of a personal 
character which smacked of psychology — he had tried to 
improvise one. 

“ I suppose/’ he had said in his halting, groping manner, 
“ I suppose it’s one of those things you can’t explain. 
However, if you come to think of it, it’s rather obvious. 
The so-called urgent matters get attended to in any case, 
whereas the other ones are apt to fall into neglect. It’s rather 
like mothers trying to get their plain daughters married 
first — a kind of compensatory social justice, if you see 
what I mean.” 

The girl who had asked the question — a pretty little 
Jewess employed as a translator and apt to take liberties 
with a kittenish air — had looked rather puzzled. She had 
meant to taunt him and had been defeated by her own 
weapons, that kind of logical feint they were all so fond of. 
Hovering over the short plump girl from the lean height of 
his six feet two inches, the A.Ch.C. was having his quiet fun. 
For he knew of course that the explanation he had given 
was at the best a first approximation to the truth. A closer 
examination, however, would have led back to the A.Ch.C.’s 
early school days and would have proved far too embarrass- 
ingly “ psychological ” to be discussed. It would have led 
back to the commandment, implanted during those early 
days, that it was bad form to be too “ keen ” on anything 
except on games, and to the conditioned reflex to restrain 
one’s rash impulses — established to a degree where the 
suppression almost preceded the impulse itself and second 
thoughts came before first. Now the A.Ch.C. was in truth 
rather keen on his job, a weakness which he successfully 
hid behind a discreetly bored and harassed air ; hence it 
seemed to him all the less permissible to rush into one’s 
office, throw one’s hat down and jump at the urgent entries 



DAYS OF WRATH 195 

like a shopkeeper tearing open his envelopes to see what 
orders had come in overnight. 

To turn to the yellow tray first and leave the red one to 
the last was thus not only a matter of sheer common sense, 
as he had pointed out to the intrusive translator, but also a 
question touching upon things which one did not mention 
explicitly for fear of sounding pompous and a prig : tradi- 
tion, dignity and form. The value of the ritual became 
enhanced by the fact that it was performed while the A.Ch.C. 
was alone in his room. In the presence of a subordinate he 
occasionally even went so far as to reverse the order ; for 
courtesy demanded that one should sometimes adapt good 
manners to bad ones so as to avoid giving offence — like 
eating with one's fingers at an Arab meal pretending that one 
enjoyed it, or arguing with Jews about legal niceties pre- 
tending that they mattered. 

The A.Ch.C. rang the hand-bell on his desk, a wrought- 
iron camel-bell whose touch gave him each time a sensuous 
pleasure, and ordered his private secretary, Miss Clark, to 
search among the files relating to the division of rights and 
duties among the various communities at the Holy Places, 
for the one concerning the status quo in the Basilica of the 
Nativity in Bethlehem. Before he had finished reading the 
next document, which was a vigorous protest of the orthodox 
Rabbinate of the anti-Zionist Agudath faction against alleged 
unorthodoxies occurring in the ritual slaughter-houses con- 
trolled by the orthodox pro-Zionist Mizrakhi faction, Miss 
Clark had come back with the required document. It was a 
report by an Arab Sub-Inspector addressed to the then 
Governor of Jerusalem, Sir Ronald Storrs, in 1920, and 
containing an admirably concise definition of those contested 
privileges, infringements of which led, at an average twice 
a year, to blows and bloodshed among the clergy of the 
various denominations. Under the heading “ Basilica of the 
Nativity , cleaning thereof ”, the record stated : 

(1) That the Greek Orthodox Community may open the windows 
of the Basilica throwing Southward, for the time of cleaning 
only. 



196 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

(3) That the Greek Orthodox Community may place a ladder on 
the floor of the Armenian chapel for cleaning the upper part 
of this chapel above the Cornice. 

(3) That the Armenians have the right to clean the North face 
of the pillar on which the Greek Orthodox pulpit is placed, 
up to the Cornice only. 

(4) That by mutual agreement the following has also been 
arranged : 

(a) That the Greeks should attach their curtain tight to the 
lower nail No. 2 at the foot of the pillar which lies South 
East of the left hand set of steps leading to the Manger 

[this paragraph the A.Ch.C. underlined with a blue 
pencil]. 

(b) That the Latins should have their curtain fall naturally 
down the same pillar, leaving a space of 16 cm. between 
it and that of the Greek Orthodox. 

(c) That nail No. 1 be left unused by any of the communities 

[this the A.Ch.C. underlined twice]. 

(5) That whenever the Government is to clean any part of the 
Basilica, the necessary implements should be Government’s. 

(6) That the above arrangement, however, is subject to altera- 
tions in case of any official documents in favour of any of 
the above communities being produced before next year’s 
cleaning.” 

“ Look,” the A.Ch.C. said to Miss Clark, “ 4 No. 1 nail 
to be left unused by any of the communities \ A nice, 
clear-cut case. I wish they were all like that.” 

Miss Clark gave one of her fervently affirmative little 
gasps. She had an unlimited admiration for the A.Ch.C., 
always harassed by those beastly native sects and com- 
munities and whatnots, and yet always patient, polite and 
kind. She tried to alleviate his burden by her quick, silent, 
self-effacing diligence, and expressed her opinions mainly in 
the form of that affirmative sigh or gasp consisting in a 
sudden sharp catching of her breath, in which all her re- 
pressed and disciplined feelings were exploded. At first the 
A.Ch.C. had been a little startled by these recurrent in- 
halatory reports, but he soon became accustomed to regarding 



DAYS OF WRATH 


197 

them as a time-saving equivalent for “ Yes, Mr. Gordon- 
Smith while the emotional implications he chose quietly 
to ignore. 

He dictated two short notes to Dunby, the Junior 
Secretary, who was to draft an answer to the Armenian 
protest, and to promise an inquiry (the sixth or seventh) 
into the ritual slaughter business ; then turned to the next 
entry. It consisted of about a dozen letters, pinned together 
with translations attached, from various Arab notables and 
village mukhtars adhering to the moderate Nashashibi party, 
who expressed their loyalty to the Government and asked 
for protection from the Arab terrorist bands. Two of the 
letters contained the naive question whether the rumour was 
true that the Government approved of terrorism as a means 
of getting rid of the Hebrews ; and if so, would the Govern- 
ment tell the terrorists to stop extracting money from Arabs 
and leave their property alone. — This, however, concerned 
the Military and the C.I.D. While handing the letter to 
Miss Clark, the A.Ch.C. permitted his thoughts to dwell for 
a second on his nephew Jimmy who served as a junior officer 
in the Black Watch, and who had had his leg amputated last 
week after an engagement with terrorist bands attacking 
a Hebrew settlement. But it only lasted for a second ; 
with a slight feeling of guilt for letting personal emotions 
creep into public business he turned to the blue, semi-urgent 
tray. 

The first document in it bore the familiar Hebrew heading 
of the Zionist Executive and the familiar signature of Mr. 
Glickstein, requesting an interview with His Excellency re 
admission of the 10,000 children from Germany. Across 
the top was written in H.E.’s pithy handwriting : “ No. 
Matter definitely settled by statement Col. Sec. Hse. 
Commons Nov. 24 and Hse. of Lords Dec. 8.” The 
A.Ch.C. turned to Miss Clark with his worried smile. 

“ He is an insistent fellow, our Mr. Glickstein, isn’t he ? ” 

Miss Clark uttered her little gasp. It was tinged with 
commiseration for her chief whom H.E. had left once more 
to hold the baby, and with disapproval for the insistent 



198 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Mr. Glickstein with his gold-toothed smile. 

“ Write that His Excellency regrets he is unable to see 
him, but that I shall be glad to have a talk with him Monday 
next at ii a.m.” 

Turning to the next item in the tray, he thought that 
H.E. went indeed a bit far in demonstrating his dislike of 
the Hebrew community. For the last year or so he had 
persistently refused to see Glickstein, and at this year’s 
official Garden Party practically none of them had been in- 
vited. Glickstein was a trying person, and his insistence on 
pushing a matter which had been settled at Cabinet level 
was both unpolitic and in deplorable taste, but equally de- 
plorable was H.E.’s demonstrative rudeness to them. It put 
one in the wrong with an otherwise perfectly good case and 
laid the Administration open to tiresome attacks in the House 
and in Geneva, which Mr. Glickstein and his friends were so 
clever at staging. However . . . 

The next item was a digest of yesterday’s Hebrew and 
Arabic Press, teeming as usual with gross inexactitudes and 
venomous attacks on each other, on dissenting factions in 
each party’s own camp, and mainly on the Government. He 
skipped the leader columns with their ever-repeated emotional 
tirades and concentrated instead on the shorter notes with 
some factual content. 

“ We hear ”, wrote the leading Hebrew paper , “ that there is 
at present no permanent Hebrew physician to attend to Hebrew 
patients at the Government Hospital in Jerusalem. We are also 
informed that the Government Health Department does not employ 
a sufficient number of Hebrew officials . Arabic reigns supreme in 
that Department. The British heads of the Department prefer 
talking Arabic to the Hebrew officials rather than Hebrew . One of 
the heads requested to be greeted in Arabic and not in Hebrew . . . 

To this page efficient Miss Clark had attached on her own 
initiative a typewritten note which said : “ Facts ascertained 
from Health Dept. In Government Hospital Jerusalem 4 
out of 10 doctors on the establishment are Jews. So are 21 
out of 53 nurses. The three members of the Hospital clerical 



DAYS OF WRATH 199 

staff are all Jews. Out of 75 medical officers in the whole 
Department at present 31 are Jewish and of 331 nurses 
38% are Jewish.” 

“ Excellent,” said the A.Ch.C. “ We'll send them a 
rectification.” 

He leant back for a moment in his chair, both arms resting 
on the supports, his tall, lean upper body bent over the desk 
in a curve. He looked out at Soleiman the Magnificent's 
wall, behind which ran King Solomon's Street through the 
shuks to the Temple Area with the Dome of the Rock 
(whose main preacher, Sheikh Abdul el Khatib, had just 
been murdered by extremists of the Mufti's clan). 

“ The pettiness of it all,” said the A.Ch.C. 

Miss Clark gave her little gasp. “ One sometimes wonders 
whether they will ever become really civilised,” she ventured. 

Miss Clark would have been at a loss to give an exact 
definition of the word “ civilised ”, yet she had a vivid image 
of its meaning : it meant lunching at the Strand Corner 
House on tea, two rolls and butter and a slice of cheese, to the 
accompaniment of the uniformed women's orchestra playing 
Liszt's Hungarian Rhapsody. 

The A.Ch.C. seemed to-day in a relaxed mood ; he was 
leaning back in his chair, pursuing his thoughts. 

“ Too much sanctity in the air — don’t you think, Miss 
Clark ? It poisons the atmosphere. Holiness is only bearable 
in mild solutions, like bath salts. The concentrated essence 
is venom.” 

The absence of the usual gasp made the A.Ch.C. realise 
that he had shocked Miss Clark. Confident, however, of her 
imminent forgiveness, he turned to the urgent tray, of which 
the main item was a lengthy confidential report from the 
C.I.D. Political Department, Branch for Hebrew Affairs, on 
the activities of the Irgun Z’zvai Le'umi or “ National Military 
Organisation ”. This extreme nationalist para-military body 
had considerably increased in strength since the affiliation of 
the so-called Bauman Group. There also seemed to be a 
marked change in their policy. Up till now the Irgun had 
been mainly engaged in smuggling in illegal immigrants from 



200 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Eastern Europe and in acts of retaliation against the Arabs. 
During the last week, however, it had succeeded in establish- 
ing a secret short-wave transmitter operating on wavelength 
37*3 for about two hours a day. The station was apparently 
ambulant as the direction of the beam had been traced on 
different days to locations varying from Tel Aviv to Lower 
Galilee. The main announcer was a Hebrew girl with a 
Sephardi accent and a pleasant contralto voice. The contents 
of the broadcasts were divided about equally between attacks 
on the Mandatory Power’s alleged anti-Zionist policy and 
attacks on the passivity of the Haganah , the leftist Defence 
Organisation controlled by the official Zionist bodies. The 
broadcasts began and closed with a recorded chorus of the 
Hebrew national anthem and were interspersed with the 
slogan “ Your kin is murdered in Europe. What are you 
doing about it ? ” monotonously repeated every five minutes. 
The switch in emphasis from anti-Arab to anti-British pro- 
paganda was marked, and seemed to point to intended terror- 
istic action against the Administration. A supplementary 
list of suspects (List III B) was attached. It contained about 
thirty names, among others that of a certain Simeon Stark 
from the Communal Settlement of Ezra’s Tower. 

. . Well, well,” said the A.Ch.C. “ What do you 
think of that ? ” 

“ I think it is a shame,” Miss Clark said primly, her pale 
cheeks faintly flushed with indignation. “ We let these people 
in and defend them against the Arabs, and instead of grati- 
tude we get this.” 

“ Quite,” said the A.Ch.C., and it occurred to him for the 
first time that Jimmy would have to cancel his entry for the 
Sports Club’s tennis tournament. “ Quite so, Miss Clark — 
though not entirely so.” 

He leaned back in his chair and for a moment stared at her 
absentmindedly. Miss Clark, lowering her lids, thought that 
the A.Ch.C. looked to-day even more harassed than usual. 
He will kill himself, what with all those beastly sects and 
communities, she thought. And yet, she confessed to herself 
with a little flutter of the heart, that harassed look somehow 



DAYS OF WRATH 201 

increased his indefinable air of distinction. She knew nobody 
so distinguished-looking as her chief — not even H.E. 
Everything about him contributed to the effect : his slimness 
and height, the delicate slope of his shoulders which was a 
result of his always having to bend down when talking to 
others ; the grey strands in the dark hair and even the slight 
irregularity of his eyes, one of which was a shade darker 
than the other, giving his glance a certain impersonal fixity 
as if he were wearing a monocle. 

Gradually the A.Ch.C. seemed to come to life again, as if 
a battery gone flat inside him were being re-charged. 
4 Quite so, Miss Clark, but not entirely so,’ he repeated to 
himself, wishing that one could see things in such a simple, 
straight-cut, black-and-white manner as Miss Clark did. 
Alas, one could not. And alas, the way one saw them made 
little difference to the final outcome. 

He at last turned to the top-urgent tray with a suppressed 
grimace of reluctance. It contained only one memo, and he 
had known all the time what it was : H.E.’s request for the 
draft of the Suggestions for a Statement of Policy by H.M. 
Government, to be submitted at London’s request. And he 
also knew the main points of H.E.’s Suggestions, as summed 
up in the pithy handwriting on the memo. 

44 Thank you, Miss Clark,” the A.Ch.C. said. 44 I shan’t 
need you any more this morning ” ; and, craning his back 
in a gothic arch over the desk, he began to draft out the paper 
in his small, punctilious hand. 

44 Shall I remind you of the time ? ” Miss Clark asked 
him from the door. 44 You have guests for luncheon.” 

44 Yes — call me at a quarter to one, will you ? ” he said 
without looking up from the paper. 

It was one of the habits of the A.Ch.C. which increased 
Miss Clark’s respect for him that, when immersed in his 
work, he regularly forgot the time. 


o 



202 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


4 

A year and a half after his first trip, Dick Matthews had 
arrived for a second visit to the Middle East. His last book, 
Has Democracy Lost Its Guts?, published a few months before, 
had been a success, which enabled him to drop newspaper 
work and concentrate on magazine pieces. He had been 
commissioned to do a series which would cover his expenses 
and were later to form the backbone of a new book. 

As he walked down the street of the Prophets with his 
heavy, lumbering gait and with the pleasant sensation of a 
double-arrack consumed at the King David Bar slowly 
mounting inside his head, he saw a hatless young working 
man, wearing shorts and the zipped leather jacket of the 
Communal Settlements, coming towards him. He had a 
kind of humorous monkey face which Matthews thought he 
had seen before, and he was walking in the middle of the 
dusty road talking to himself, his lips moving and his eye- 
brows, grown together over the saddle of the nose, jumping 
up and down. 

Matthews halted at the edge of the pavement. “ Sh’mana 
Bakkur ,” he called in a throaty Michigan-Hebrew with a 
half-choked flourish after each vowel, “ amod, stop, I know 
you from somewhere.” 

The young man stopped, looked at him blankly for a 
second, then smiled. 

“Joseph — from Ezra’s Tower,” he said in ringing 
public-school English. “ So you have come back to us and 
have learned Hebrew as well.” 

“ Yepp — a few words,” said Matthews. “ I grew to like 
your bloody country.” 

“ Which half of it — ours or the Arabs* ? ” 

“ For God’s sake,” said Matthews. “ Can’t you lay off it 
even for the first thirty seconds ? ” 

“ No,” said Joseph. “ You couldn’t either if you lived 
here.” 



DAYS OF WRATH 203 

“ What were you reciting to yourself when I wakened 
you ? A manifesto ? ” 

“ No — our monthly deficit. I am now a kind of treasurer 
of the Commune, you see.” 

“ Is that why you are in Jerusalem instead of tilling the 
soil in Galilee ? ” 

“ Precisely.” 

“ And where are you going now ? ” 

“ To the Settlement Department of the Executive. 
Trying to get them to guarantee a six months’ promissory 
note for a hundred pounds on the Workers’ Co-operative 
Bank, of which sum I shall pay fifty pounds as a token of 
goodwill to the Agricultural Co-operative Institute, where a 
bill of ours for two hundred and fifty pounds was due 
yesterday.” 

“ Christ,” said Matthews. “ And what are you going to 
do with the remaining fifty ? ” 

“ Lend it to the Treasurer of Commune Dalia, who in 
exchange promised me a promissory note of three hundred 
pounds guaranteed by the Dairy Co-operative ‘ T’nuva out 
of which I hope to get at least seventy-five cash from the 
W.C.B., for which I hope to buy a second-hand tractor 
engine which was advertised in Davar by a farmer in 
Rekhovot.” 

“ And when are you going to be bankrupt ? ” asked 
Matthews. 

“ Never. On the contrary, we are quite prosperous. We 
have discovered a new spring which will give us enough 
water to irrigate another sixty dunums. But we have got a 
credit-inflation in the country and no cash, so one has to 
juggle along.” 

“ I want to hear more about that,” said Matthews. 
“ Now I’ve got a luncheon date with your honourable 
what’s-his-name. What about dining with me at the King 
David to-morrow ? ” 

“ Like this ? ” said Joseph, pointing to his leather jacket 
and shorts. “ I haven’t got any other clothes here.” (Nor 
anywhere else, he thought.) 



204 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ Who cares ? ” said Matthews. “ Got some complexes 
about it ? ” 

Joseph smiled, shaking his head. “ All right, I’ll come,” 
he said after a moment’s hesitation. “ Good-bye.” 

“ So long,” said Matthews. But after a few steps Joseph 
turned and walked back towards him. 

“ Listen,” he said with some hesitation. “ You come 
from abroad and know what’s going on there. We here 
know nothing. What do you think our chances are — I mean 
politically ? ” 

Matthews looked at him steadily for a second. 

“ Bad,” he said. “ Mr. Chamberlain is selling out on 
you.” 

Joseph gave no answer. He stood for a moment or two, 
his eyebrows raised, then turned to go. 

At ten minutes to one the A.Ch.C. turned through the 
gap in the stone wall into the cactus garden in front of his 
house. It was an old converted one-storey Arab building, 
from the outside nothing but an austere stone cube with 
thick walls and small windows ; but inside it was cool and 
dim and comfortable with the slightly musty atmosphere of 
a vault. The entrance door opened into a large hall with a 
stone-tiled floor and a few Persian rugs. It was sparsely 
furnished with sofas and easy-chairs along the walls, low 
inlaid casual tables and a huge fireplace of bricks which, 
though rather incongruous, fitted pleasantly into the general 
picture. In the centre of the room stood, somewhat 
statuesque, Lady Joyce, offering her forehead to the ritual 
flamingo-kiss. From the quality of her smile the A.Ch.C. 
gathered that his wife was indisposed with a touch of 
migraine. Like many barren women, she tended to pay 
exaggerated attention to her periodic indispositions and the 
climate made it all the worse. 

The Arab man-servant brought the tray with drinks and 
three letters. One was an invitation to a painter’s exhibition 
in Tel Aviv printed in English and Hebrew, the second an 
invitation by the Jaffa citrus growers printed in English and 



DAYS OF WRATH 


205 

Arabic, the third a short typewritten letter on ordinary fools- 
cap with no heading and no signature, in Hebrew only. 
The A.Ch.C.’s Hebrew being rudimentary, he was on the 
point of pocketing the letter to have it translated later, when 
a word typed in capitals caught his eye : it was MA’VET, 
death. He fetched the dictionary from the shelf, and sinking 
into his armchair, his legs crossed, began to decipher it while 
sipping his arrack. 

“ Why do you bother ? ” asked Joyce. 

“ It’s something rather quaint,” the A.Ch.C. said, looking 
up a word in the dictionary. After a couple of minutes he 
had finished. 

“ Now listen to this,” he said, holding the letter carefully 
at its edges between outstretched fingers. 

“ The Assistant Chief Commissioner , Jerusalem . — Repeated 
warnings were sent to the Police Informer and Agent Provocateur 
Itzhak Ben David of 133 Bukhara Street in Haifa , to stop his 
treacherous activities. 

“ These warnings having been of no avail , the High Command 
of the Hebrew National Military Organisation , after hearing the 
evidence submitted , has found Itzhak Ben David guilty of High 
Treason towards the Nation , and passed sentence of death on 
him. 

“ The sentence will be carried out at the first available oppor- 
tunity. ...” 

“ Rather funny,” said Joyce. 

“ I don’t think it is. These fellows mean business. They 
have killed in what they call reprisal actions quite a lot 
of Arabs.” 

“ Killing Arabs is different,” said Joyce. “ They won’t 
dare touch a man working with us.” 

“ I wonder,” said the A.Ch.C., replacing the dictionary 
on its shelf. His further comments were interrupted by the 
servant announcing the first guests, Professor Shenkin of the 
Hebrew University and his wife. 

Professor Shenkin was an elderly little man with a goatee, 
who advanced towards the mistress of the house with a deep 



206 thieves in the night 

bow and an outstretched hand. His wife Rebecca was short, 
fat and swarthy ; she came from one of the old Jewish 
families in Jerusalem who had lived there under Turkish rule 
for well over a hundred years. Her father, a baker in the 
Old City, had amassed a fortune by real-estate speculations 
and owned several houses in the ancient quarter of the 
Hundred Gates. He was an orthodox Jew and fiercely 
opposed to political Zionism. In the old Turkish days the 
few thousand Jews in the country — mostly saintly old 
people who had come to die in the Land — had been 
tolerated by the Moslems except for an occasional pogrom 
hardly worth mentioning ; whereas now that the Zionists 
had come with their talk of a Hebrew State, the Arabs had 
become hostile, the National Fund made land speculation 
almost impossible, the heathen youth in the Communes were 
desecrating the Land, and the workers in the bakery were 
organised in trade unions. Mrs. Shenkin inwardly shared 
her father’s convictions, but she never argued about them 
with her husband who had come from Bucharest and was a 
Zionist, though of the most moderate wing. She was very 
proud of being married to a university professor. She was 
aware of the fact that her father’s money had been a decisive 
factor in the match but found this not disturbing ; how could 
one expect a learned savant to marry a baker’s daughter if 
she had not even money ? She had gratefully borne him five 
children, and on the whole their marriage had been very 
happy. 

When the greetings were over, Mrs. Shenkin found 
herself standing in the uncomfortable presence of Lady Joyce 
Gordon-Smith at the fireplace, while the two men had drifted 
away towards the other end of the room. The servant offered 
her a drink, and Mrs. Shenkin violently shook her head. 
“ I drink not. I am not a modernish woman,” she said in 
her terrible English. 

“ I do,” Joyce announced languidly. Leaning with her 
back against the fireplace she looked down at the top of Mrs. 
Shenkin’s head, trying to find out whether she wore a wig. 
Joyce had been told that all orthodox Jewish women had 



DAYS OF WRATH 207 

their hair cut when they were married and had to wear a 
wig for the rest of their lives. But through the thin, greyish 
strands on Mrs. Shenkin’s crown she could see the pale 
shimmer of her scalp ; she wore no wig. 

“ We just come back from Tel Aviv,” Mrs. Shenkin said 
conversationally. “We were visiting my second son who 
studies in the Gymnasium. Tel Aviv is a beautiful city. 
You go often there ? ” 

“ Never,” said Joyce. She had only been to Tel Aviv 
once, and the dreadful architecture of the Hebrew town, its 
broiling streets lined with lemonade shops, teeming with a 
sweaty, noisy crowd, had made her feel that she had fallen 
into a Semitic ant-heap. She loved to walk through the Arab 
shuks, though they were even more crowded and smelly ; 
but then, they were the Orient — whereas Tel Aviv was 
only a Mediterranean East End, a cross between White- 
chapel and Monte Carlo. 

“ Why not ? ” asked Mrs. Shenkin. “ Do you not like 
to swim in the sea ? ” 

Mrs. Shenkin never swam in the sea but she rightly 
assumed that Joyce did. 

“ It is too crowded,” said Joyce. 

“ Yes — what crowds ! ” cried Mrs. Shenkin. “ Soon 
Tel Aviv will have hundred fifty thousand people. And 
twenty years ago — nothing.” Though rather anti-Zionistic, 
Mrs. Shenkin shared in the general Jewish pride in Tel 
Aviv. 

Joyce said nothing. She sipped her dry Martini with an 
inward-turned look, preoccupied with her indisposition. 
These fat Jewish women were supposed to know about 
herbal teas and things. But then it was of course impossible 
to ask her. 

“ This is my son,” announced Mrs. Shenkin. Left to 
bear the brunt of the conversation, she had produced a photo- 
graph from her bag. 

“ Nice,” said Joyce after a fleeting glance, without taking 
the photograph from Mrs. Shenkin’s hands. However, she 
had to admit that the slim, fair boy looked remarkably 



208 thieves in the night 

attractive. How these two ugly people had succeeded in 
producing him, beat her. 

“ He is a genius,” Mrs. Shenkin remarked matter-of- 
factly. “ He translates Pushkin’s poems into the Hebrew 
language.” 

“ How clever,” said Joyce, 

“ Yes. He translates Pushkin and he knows not one word 
of Russian.” 

Lady Joyce suddenly started coughing into her cocktail. 
She made a mental note of the story for the Club : the Jewish 
infant prodigy who translates Pushkin without knowing 
Russian. She put her glass down. 

“ Then how does he do it ? ” she asked with, for the first 
time, a certain warmth in her voice. 

u Oh, it is quite easy,” said Mrs. Shenkin. “ A friend of 
his who is Russian tells him the contents and then he makes 
it rhyme.” 

“ How very clever,” said Joyce. 

The servant announced Mr. Richard Matthews, and the 
American lumbered into the room, looking rather untidy, 
somewhat absent-minded and slightly tight. Joyce had met 
him at a luncheon party which H.E. had given during 
Matthews’ first visit, and had instantly disliked him. He was 
clumsy, uncivil and conceited in a kind of vulgar-demo- 
cratic way — typically American. However, he had made 
himself quite a reputation during the last two years, and as 
the A.Ch.C.’s wife one had to entertain all sorts of people. 
This party was in his honour, and the Shenkins had been 
produced because those American papers always complained 
that one was not nice enough to the Jews. To restore 
the balance she had also asked Kamel Effendi el Shallabi, 
the editor of a moderate Arab weekly, but he was late as 
usual. 

They stood around the fireplace, holding their glasses, 
with the dull feeling of pointlessness which is the ritual 
atmosphere of all Jerusalem parties. Professor Shenkin was 
holding forth with some involved story about excavations 
on the Dead Sea, and why they had gone wrong. Now and 



DAYS OF WRATH 


209 

then the A.Ch.C., with an air of friendly approval, put in an 
unobtrusive question which showed up the professor’s ignor- 
ance of archaeology. However, Shenkin was not an archaeo- 
logist but a professor of philosophy, though nobody knew 
what exactly he philosophised about. In a lifetime he had 
only published two short papers in Hebrew periodicals, one 
on “ Spinoza and the Neo-Platonists ”, the other on “ Tal- 
mudic Influences on German Mediaeval Mysticism ”. There 
was a rumour that he had obtained his chair at the University 
because some relation of his was on the Board of Curators in 
America from where the money came. 

At last Kamel Effendi arrived, red-faced, buoyant, ele- 
gant, and carrying a bunch of roses for the hostess. He 
greeted the Shenkins with effusive heartiness though they 
had met only once, eight years ago at an official garden-party. 
There were more drinks. Matthews had a huge whisky and 
soda, Kamel Effendi an arrack which he sipped rather daintily 
with his little finger sticking out, while the Professor nursed 
a glass of sweet, sticky local vermouth. Watching him, Joyce 
remembered with a shudder the one dinner-party at the 
Glicksteins’ which she had been forced to attend, and where 
they gave you sweet Carmel wine in liqueur glasses with 
your fish. 

At last the party moved into the dining-room. A slight 
odour in the air informed Joyce that the Arab cook had once 
again burnt the pilaff — he always did it when there were 
Jewish guests, though how he knew beforehand remained a 
mystery. However, she felt too fed-up with all of them 
to care. 

Kamel Effendi was holding the stage. Prompted by a 
question of Matthews, he had launched into Arab politics : 

“ Ah, the Mufti, the Mufti ! ” he cried. “ He and his 
family are the ruin of the country. How often have we 
warned our English friends against the machinations of 
the Husseini clan ! We told them how the Mufti used his 
position and the religious funds entrusted to him to finance 
his terrorist gangsters. In each little village he had his 
agents. In each mosque the mullah preached hatred and 



210 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

murder by his orders. Alas — you did not believe us. . . 

He turned to the A.Ch.C. with a waggishly accusing finger. 
“ No, you did not believe us, so you supported Hadj Amin 
until he betrayed you and the country was flowing with blood. 
And then you let him escape under your nose to Syria from 
where he continues to make trouble with Italian money.” 

The A.Ch.C., smiling, applied himself to the burnt pilaff. 
He looked like a tolerant schoolmaster at a picnic whose 
pupils have got slightly out of hand, pretending not to 
notice it. 

44 Is it true that he escaped from the Omar Mosque in 
women’s clothes ? ” asked Mrs. Shenkin’s piping little voice. 

44 Bbah ! ” cried Kamel Effendi. 44 I care not how he 
escaped. I care that his paid bandits have killed my cousin 
Mussa Effendi, and Fakhri Bey Nashashibi, and Sheikh 
Abdul Khatib the great preacher of the Omar Mosque. 
Hadj Amin is a curse. All the Husseini family and their 
National Party are a curse. They kill and blackmail every- 
body opposed to them and drive us to bloodshed.” 

The arrack and the heavy burgundy-type wine from 
Rishon le Zion were beginning to tell on Kamel Effendi. 
His face had grown even redder and he spoke in a rather 
loud voice. 

44 You talk almost like a Zionist, Kamel Effendi,” said the 
A.Ch.C., who was having his quiet fun. 

44 A Zionist — bbah ! ” said Kamel Effendi. 44 We don’t 
need the Husseinis to fight Zionism. All Arabs are united 
against the Zionist danger.” Suddenly remembering the 
Shenkins, he turned with a broad smile to the Professor. 
44 It is not personal,” he said affably. 44 Friends remain 
friends. We are talking about principles.” 

The Professor, who had tucked his napkin under his grey 
goatee, smiled back eagerly. 

44 We each have our extremists and trouble-makers to 
cope with in our own camp,” he said unctuously. 44 You 
have your Mufti and his followers, and we have our young 
fanatics. Without them, Arabs and Jews could live as happily 
together as they did a thousand years ago in Spain.” 



DAYS OF WRATH 


211 


“ Quite so,” said the A.Ch.C. “ The question is of course 
on what terms,” he added innocently. 

“ Terms — bbah ! ” cried Kamel Effendi, and he unex- 
pectedly turned to his hostess who sat in a cramped erect 
position in her chair, waiting for that faint tide of pain to 
return. “ If you, madame, honour me with an invitation to 
your house, do I ask you for terms f And enjoying the 
privilege of your hospitality, do I ask to be master of the 
house ? No, madame, I do not. It is the same with our 
Jewish friends. They enjoy our hospitality — ahlan w y sahlan> 
you are welcome. We will be like brothers. We will receive 
you with open arms as our guests. ...” 

“ Yeah — paying guests,” murmured Matthews, but for- 
tunately Kamel Effendi did not hear him. The A.Ch.C., 
who did hear, helped himself to more pilaff. 

“. . . like brothers,” concluded Kamel Effendi. “ Just 
as in the glorious days of the Spanish Caliphate, as our friend 
the Professor said. But terms — bbah ! If they want our 
house — never ! ” 

“ Well, Professor ? ” said Matthews with a heavy wink 
of his eyes. " It’s your turn now.” 

Shenkin was stroking his goatee. 

“ Of course,” he said. “ Personally I see our friend's 
point. I was always opposed to this provocative talk about 
a Hebrew State which only upsets our Arab friends. For me, 
Zion is a symbol. A state ! What is a state ? A selfish, old- 
fashioned prejudice. . . 

“ Aywah ! ” nodded Kamel Effendi. “ This is very 
true.” 

“ Our young fanatics,” the Professor went on, “ want a 
Jewish majority. What is this talk ? A provocation. What 
are numbers ? What are quantities ? It is the spirit which 
counts. We must come in a spirit of friendship and under- 
standing to our Arab friends. The Jews abhor violence. It 
is our historical mission. . . .” 

“ Boloney,” Matthews said suddenly and audibly. They 
all looked at him, but he was absorbed in his pilaff. 

“ Won't you have some more ? ” Joyce asked with a 



212 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

ringing voice through the silence. “ Though I’m afraid it’s 
rather . . 

“ Yes,” said Mrs. Shenkin earnestly, “ it is burnt. Our 
cook also does it. It is because of the Primus stoves.” 

“ Yes — aren’t they awful ? ” Joyce said icily. 

“ Look,” said Matthews, having swallowed the last bite 
on his plate, and turning to the Professor. “ Have you people 
come to build a country or just another ghetto ? ” 

“ I came,” said Professor Shenkin who was squirming on 
his seat, “ I came to teach at the Hebrew University.” 

“ Damn your University,” said Matthews. “ People 
must have security first, and some income, and some leisure, 
before they can think of a university. You do everything 
the wrong way round.” 

“ This is a matter of opinion,” said Shenkin. 

“ It isn’t ”, said Matthews, emptying his glass. “ You 
people drive me crazy. One wants to help you and you 
make it so hellish difficult.” 

Kamel Effendi chuckled. “ That is a very true remark, 
Mr. Matthews. We are in the same position. We want to 
help these poor people, and how do they thank us ? They 
want to take our house away.” 

“ Aw, chuck that talk about your house,” said Matthews. 
“ For the last five hundred years it wasn’t yours but the 
Turks’.” 

Kamel Effendi went red again, while Shenkin relaxed in 
his chair, dabbing his head with his napkin. 

“ The majority of the population has always been Arab,” 
cried Kamel Effendi. “ Take myself. My family is de- 
scended directly from Walid el Shallabi, Muhammed’s 
conquering General. We are the most ancient family in 
Palestine. . . . The Husseinis and Nashashibis are mere 
parvenus,” he could not refrain from adding. 

“ My father is a Cohen,” Mrs. Shenkin piped suddenly. 
“ And the Cohens are the descendants of the Kohanim, the 
priests in the old days.” 

“ Shall we go ? ” Joyce said to her, rising rather abruptly. 
She had been impatiently waiting for Matthews to finish his 



DAYS OF WRATH 


213 

last spoonful of ice-cream and now felt that she wouldn’t be 
able to stick it a minute longer. Seeing the Shenkin woman’s 
bewilderment and ignorance of English custom, she ex- 
plained : “ The gentlemen will join us later for coffee.” 
And with a contrite smile she sailed out of the room, followed 
by the short, waddling Mrs. Shenkin, a queen with inade- 
quate suite. 

The four men stood for a second, and as they sat down 
again the A.Ch.C. said, to turn the conversation : 

“ There seems to be a khamsin in the air. My wife 
usually feels it twenty-four hours in advance.” 

“ That’s your local variety of the sirocco ? ” asked 
Matthews. 

“ Yes — only more pernicious.” 

“ Ah — the khamsin ! ” cried Kamel Effendi. “ In a real 
khamsin everybody goes crazy.” 

“ Then this country must be living in a permanent 
khamsin,” said Matthews. 

Kamel Effendi laughed stertorously. The Professor 
stroked his beard. 

“ When the east wind breathes, the pastures of the 
shepherds mourn and the head of Carmel withers,” he 
quoted from somewhere in the Bible. 

“ Quite,” said the A.Ch.C. “ But the same scorching 
east wind is also called ‘ the breath of the Lord ’. So if we 
are all mad, it’s holy madness, you see.” 

“ I reckon,” said Matthews, “ that God Almighty has less 
to do with it than your Colonial Office.” 

“ Aywah said Kamel Effendi. “ And your Lord 
Balfour.” 

“ There we go again,” said the A.Ch.C. “ Who would 
like some port or liqueur ? ” 

They all refused except Matthews, who took a balloon- 
glass of brandy. “ What was wrong with old Balfour ? ” he 
asked, thrusting his big untidy head towards Kamel Effendi. 

“ He gave our house away,” said Kamel Effendi, who liked 
to stick to the same metaphor. 

“ More boloney,” said Matthews, tasting the brandy and 



214 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

finding that it was good. 44 There never was a house here. 
There was a desert and a stinking swamp and pox-ridden 
fellaheen. You were the pariahs of the Levant and to-day 
you are the richest of the Arab countries. Your population 
was on the decrease for centuries because half your babes were 
dying from filth in their cradles, and since the Jews came 
it has doubled. They haven’t robbed you of an inch of your 
land, but they have robbed you of your malaria and your 
trachoma and your septic childbeds and your poverty. . . 

“ Come, come, Mr. Matthews/’ the A.Ch.C. said, putting 
on his harassed air, though secretly he was enjoying himself. 
“ This is rather strong language, and a bit unfair too.” 

Kamel Effendi had jumped up from his seat. He was 
gasping for words. 

44 Bbah ! ” he brought out at last. 44 Now we know where 
we are. You come here as our guest, saying you are a 
journalist from America — but you are just one of those 
people whom they ...” He made a frantic gesture of 
rubbing his index against his thumb, and his face underwent 
a rather unpleasant change. 

44 Yeah,” Matthews said calmly. 44 I am one of the 
Elders of Zion — huh ? ” 

“ I think it is time we joined the ladies,” said the A.Ch.C., 
and the Professor obediently got to his feet, but Kamel paid 
no attention to him. 

44 I care not who you are,” he shouted. 44 You come here 
as our guest and then you abuse us. That is what we receive 
for our hospitality. . . .” 

44 Come off it, Mr. Kamel,” said Matthews. 44 1 am not 
your guest, I am paying my keep, and I haven’t asked your 
permission.” 

44 1 care not whether you pay,” cried Kamel Effendi. 
44 And I care not for their hospitals and their schools. This 
is our country, you understand ? We want no foreign bene- 
factors. We want not to be patronised. We want to be left 
alone, you understand ! We want to live our own way and 
we want no foreign teachers and no foreign money and no 
foreign habits and no smiles of condescension and no pat on 



DAYS OF WRATH 215 

the shoulder and no arrogance and no shameless women with 
wriggling buttocks in our holy places. We want not their 
honey and we want not their sting, you understand ? Neither 
their honey nor their sting. This you can tell them in your 
America. If they are thrown out in other countries — very 
bad, very sorry. Very, very sorry — but not our business. 
If they want to come here — a few of them, maybe thousand, 
maybe two thousand — t'faddal , welcome. But then know 
you are guests and know how to behave. Otherwise — to the 
devil. Into the sea — and hallass, finished. This is plain 
language. You tell them.” 

There was a painful silence while Kamel Effendi wiped his 
forehead and the A.Ch.C. stood hovering over the group like 
an unhappy flamingo. Then Matthews said unexpectedly : 

“ Yeah — I see your point, Mr. Kamel. I guess you are 
wrong, but wrong in your own right.” 

The A.Ch.C. gave him a curious little stare with his two- 
coloured eyes ; he seemed on the point of making a remark, 
and on second thoughts didn’t. But Kamel Effendi laughed 
stertorously and without transition. 

“ Ho ! — ho ! ” he shouted. “ Wrong within your own 
rights. It is a profound saying, my friend — very profound.” 
He appreciatively clicked his tongue, and spontaneously 
grasped Matthews’ hand, pumping it. “ No offence, Mr. 
Matthews,” he said. “ Here we all get a little heated some- 
times. It is our climate, you know — the khamsin.” 

And so they all repaired to join the ladies in a fairly jolly 
mood — except for the Professor who slunk along the 
corridor with his head on one side and trailing his finger 
along the wall. 


5 


The Shenkins soon left — they had to visit a daughter-in-law 
who had just given birth to her third child in the maternity 
clinic of the Hadassah ; Kamel Effendi followed a few 
minutes later. Matthews, having asked the A.Ch.C. for a 



216 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

quarter of an hour’s off-the-record talk, stayed on. Joyce 
retired to lie down in her room ; the khamsin was getting 
worse and so were her nerves. 

“ Cigar ? ” the A.Ch.C. asked when they were alone. He 
sank into his favourite armchair and let the harassed look 
slowly fade from his face. “ Well, Mr. Matthews,” he said, 
“ to-day you had a taste of the peculiar atmosphere of this 
little country. And they were both moderates, mind you. . . 

“ The Professor sure was,” said Matthews. “ I reckon 
the matching of the teams was pretty unfair.” 

The A.Ch.C. smiled. “ Possibly,” he said. “ But you 
can’t expect me to invite for fairness’ sake a Hebrew terrorist. 
Mind you, I would enjoy it, but my wife is rather fond of 
her furniture.” 

Matthews filled up his half-empty brandy glass with soda. 
“ Christ,” he said. “ Your khamsin takes it out of a guy.” 
He emptied the glass and put it down on the inlaid table with 
a slight clank. “ And now tell me straight, Mr. Chief Com- 
missioner,” he said, shifting his heavy body forward in the 
chair, “ why are you selling out on them ? ” 

“ I am afraid. . . .” 

“ Aw, come off it. Don’t be afraid. This will be strictly 
off the record, Mr. Chief Commissioner.” 

“ Assistant,” corrected the A.Ch.C. Though he kept 
smiling politely, the difference in colour between his two 
eyes became accentuated, a sign that he was angry. “ May 
I ask what exactly you mean by ‘ selling out ’ ? ” 

“ Aw, come off it,” Matthews repeated, drawing out each 
vowel into a lingering flourish. It was as if a massive bull 
deliberately tried to excite the slender matador. “You have 
read the League of Nations reports. They say plainly that 
you have been inciting the Arabs against the Hebrews so that 
you should have an excuse to let Zionism down.” 

The A.Ch.C. tipped the ash from his cigar with the 
circumspection of a clinical operation. It occurred to him 
that he couldn’t go to see Jimmy in the hospital on Sunday 
as he had promised to open a Horticultural Exhibition in 
Tel Aviv. 



DAYS OF WRATH 217 

“ My dear sir,’’ he said, “ I am a sincere admirer of the 
Jews. They are the most admirable salesmen in the world, 
regardless of whether they sell carpets, Marxism, psycho- 
analysis or their own pogromed infants. It is child’s-play 
for them to get around well-meaning people such as Professor 
Rappard and other members of the Geneva Mandates Com- 
mission — or members of both our Houses if it comes to that. 
If those fantastic accusations were true, how would you 
explain the fact that we had two hundred British soldiers 
killed fighting the Arab revolt ? Don’t you think the fact 
that they were defending Jewish life and property deserves 
to be mentioned when certain rash criticisms are made ? ” 

“ That’s so much sob-talk,” said Matthews, filling up his 
glass uninvited. — I’ll drive this smug guy mad, even if he 
calls his Ahmed or Mahmud to throw me out, he thought. 
“ A year back,” he went on, “ when I was here the first time, 
I saw a gang of your Mufti’s Arab cut-throats throwing stones 
at a couple of old Jews and yelling at the top of their voices : 
‘ Eddaula ma'na ,’ ‘ The Government is with us.’ Will you 
deny that, Mr. Chief Commissioner ? ” 

“ Assistant,” the A.Ch.C. corrected. “ I shall certainly 
not deny it. The trouble-makers make the crowd believe it, 
just as they make them believe that Jews are throwing dead 
pigs into the Mosque of Omar. But it would be a bit unfair 
to make us responsible for each rumour in the shuks, 
wouldn’t it ? ” 

“ No, you won’t get away with that,” said Matthews. 
“ The Arabs believed that you welcomed the killing of Jews 
because your whole attitude encouraged them to believe it. 
You backed the Mufti during twenty years though you knew 
about his doings, I have read your Royal Commission’s 
Report, all the four hundred pages of it, which accuses your 
local administration of condoning Arab terrorism. This 
isn’t Jewish sales-talk — it’s printed in your Majesty’s 
Stationery Office. I know one of your Intelligence guys who 
toured in his car the Arab villages near Nazareth, telling 
them not to sell land to the Jews because your Government 
is against it. I know of others who smuggled arms to the 

p 



2x8 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Syrian rebels. I know this isn’t your personal responsibility, 
but you should have raised hell to stop those romantic young 
pansies from your universities being let loose to chase about 
in Beduin dress and stir up trouble. I have met a few of 
these hush-hush guys, and if I had a say in your Government 
I would spank their arses and send them back to college. 
Aw, let’s talk straight, Mr. Chief Commissioner. You’ve 
been asking for trouble and you’ve got it, and now you com- 
plain because English soldiers are killed. You had to crush 
the Arab gangs, not for the sake of the Jews but for your own 
sake, because this country is the strategic centre of your 
Empire, and you need it. Even so, you did bloody little to 
defend the Hebrew settlers who were left to look after them- 
selves and sent to jail for possessing rifles with which to 
defend themselves and their women-folk. . . .” He pulled 
a dog-eared notebook from his pocket. “ Here, your Royal 
Commission’s Report, page 201 : ‘ To-day it is evident that 
the elementary duty of providing public security has not been 
discharged . If there is one grievance which the Jews have 
undoubted right to prefer it is the absence of security . . . 
No, Mr. Chief Commissioner, you won’t get away with it 
so easy. Your gratitude-talk may go down with your phoney 
Professor and his like, but it won’t go down with an im- 
partial observer.” 

He puffed and finished the rest of his glass. 4 Christ,’ 
he thought, ‘ if he doesn’t rise to that he’s a dead fish.’ 
— The A.Ch.C. looked at him thoughtfully. 

“ The impartial observer referred to is doubtless yourself, 
Mr. Matthews ? ” he asked quietly. 

“ I guess I am,” Matthews said. “ I am not a Jew, and 
back home I disliked them as much as anybody else did.” 

“ But you seem to have undergone a conversion.” 

“ Yea. You can call it that if you like.” 

“ Doubtless our persuasive Mr. Glickstein had a strong 
influence on you.” 

“ Glickstein be damned. He’s the same type as your 
Professor. They stink of ghetto.” 

“ Then what made you change your mind in this rather 



DAYS OF WRATH 219 

— violent way, if I may ask without being unduly curious ? 35 

“ You may. I’ve seen their settlements. I've been down 
the Jordan Valley and up in Galilee and in the Jezreel Valley 
and in the Huleh swamps. Those are some guys. They 3 re a 
new type. They've quit being Jews and become Hebrews . 33 

“ I share your admiration for them. But after all, don't 
you think you are being a little romantic about it — just as 
some people whom you dislike are being romantic about the 
Arabs ? " 

“ Nope. I haven't seen the Arabs producing anything 
worth showing off, except cabarets and filthy postcards, 
from Tangier to Teheran — not for the last thousand years .' 3 

The A.Ch.C. smiled. 

“ Has it never occurred to you that a race may cherish 
and preserve certain values or a way of life, which are not 
expressed in spectacular achievements ? " 

“ Maybe," said Matthews. “ But that isn’t the point we 
were discussing. I am not so easy to side-track, Mr. Com- 
missioner. It's not the philosophy of life we are discussing, 
but the policy of your Government which is selling out on 
the Jews." 

The A.Ch.C. gave a mock-distressed sigh. 

“ No, you are not easily side-tracked, Mr. Matthews. I 
had the privilege to admire your singleness of mind in your 
book Has Democracy Lost Its Punch ? " 

“ Guts," Matthews corrected. “ Guts, guts, guts. But 
that too is beside the point." 

“ Not so much as it seems," the A.Ch.C. said mildly. 
“ Your book is, if I may say so, a brilliant and pungent 
attack on what is termed by a popular though nebulous 
catchword our policy of appeasement in Europe. Well, 
Mr. Matthews, I must confess I am an inveterate sinner in 
your and your friends' eyes. I am in favour of coming to 
terms with the Arabs — of appeasing them, if you like. In 
other words, I believe that all policy, past, present and future, 
has to be based on reasonable compromise." 

“ Yea," said Matthews. “ The question is what you call 
reasonable." 



220 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ Let’s see,” said the A.Ch.C. “ I thought the term self- 
explanatory. But that may be a national prejudice. So we 
nad better consult the dictionary. . . 

He emerged from his armchair and crossed with his gentle 
flamingo-stoop to the bookshelf. 

“ Now let’s see,” he said, visibly regaining the mood of 
quiet fun. . . Rear-arch, rear-vault, reason, reasonable. 
Here we are : “ Sound of judgement, sensible , moderate , not 
expecting too much , ready to listen to reason ; agreeable to 
reason , not absurd , not greatly less or more than might be ex- 
pected ; inexpensive, tolerable , fair . . . . That’s about all the 
Concise Oxford Dictionary has to say. If this doesn’t satisfy 
you, I’ve also got here the Shorter Oxford Dictionary in two 
volumes, and the Oxford Dictionary in twelve.” 

Leaning against the bookshelves, he politely smiled down 
at Matthews who once more filled his glass with soda, 
conscious of the poisoned absurdity of this dialogue. It may 
have been the khamsin — which gave him the sensation that 
the rubbing of his shirt drew sparks from his skin and raised 
the fluff on his chest in tingling irritation ; or perhaps it was 
just the general atmospheric poison of the country. As his 
eyes met the A.Ch.C.’s double-coloured gaze, he asked him- 
self from what source that guy derived his arrogantly modest 
self-assurance. What’s he got to be so modest about ? he 
asked himself, his head slightly swimming. And suddenly 
he had an absurd vision of the A.Ch.C. as a boy walking 
along that narrow passage of the via dolorosa with its twelve 
stations from the Lower First to the Upper Sixth. At its 
beginning stood a trembling little boy in a cricket cap, thin- 
limbed, sensitive, and rather too imaginative, rather too keen 
on poetry and all that ; past the fifth or sixth station stalked 
a completely transformed person with a jutting Adam’s apple 
and a breaking voice, in the painful process of having his 
sensitivity derided and his reflexes conditioned so that re- 
pression came before impulse and second thoughts preceded 
firsts ; at the end emerged the striped-trousered finished 
product of that exclusive passion lane, that distinguished 
torture-chamber and soul-tannery — encased in a supple 



DAYS OF WRATH 221 

and resilient crust, a tanned hide impermeable both to 
outside influences and the sealed-off pressure from within ; 
an adhesive armour the more impregnable as it was not 
something put on, but the crustification of formerly living 
tissue transformed into supple callousness. . . . 

Matthews yawned and stretched his legs out. 44 Aw, Mr. 
Chief Commissioner, let's come to the point." 

“ Help yourself to another drink," the A.Ch.C. said, 
crossing back to his armchair. “ The whole matter is simpler 
than it appears. From the beginning the Husseini clan had 
the strongest following among the Arabs ; and among the 
Husseinis Hadj Amin, the later Mufti, commanded the 
greatest authority. Hence the smoothest way of dealing with 
the Arabs was to deal through him. We would naturally 
have preferred to deal with the Moderates ; just as we pre- 
ferred dealing with Dr. Bruening to dealing with Herr 
Hitler. In both cases we were accused of 4 backing ' the 
extreme wing whereas in fact our policy merely endorsed, 
and adjusted itself to, the regrettable but undeniable course 
of events. Arab Nationalism here is growing rapidly and 
inevitably as in Egypt, Iraq and Syria. There may be 
individual sympathisers with this trend in some of our 
Departments, just as we have individual admirers of Herr 
Hitler — though I may point out in parenthesis that I am 
not one of them ; however, I can assure you that these 
personal inclinations have hardly any influence on our basic 
policy. Nationalistic movements necessarily follow an ir- 
rational trend ; hence it is useless to argue with Arab national- 
ists, even of the more moderate brand, about the indubitable 
benefits they derive from Jewish immigration. They want to 
be masters in a country where they form the majority ; and 
they are afraid of and opposed to Jewish domination, regard- 
less of any material benefits. ..." 

“ Then why do they sell their land to the Jews whenever 
they get a chance ? " 

44 My dear sir — individual greed and patriotic feeling are 
antagonists as old as the world. The desire to eat one's 
cake and have it is a general human characteristic." 



222 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

4 4 And so you are going to make it your business to check 
this greed and foster patriotic feelings by prohibiting the sale 
of land to the Jews. . . .” 

44 We may indeed have to enforce legislation to that 
effect,” the A.Ch.C. said casually, while wondering where 
this confounded American intruder got his inside informa- 
tion from. 

44 You realise, Mr. Chief Commissioner, that such a law, 
prohibiting the free sale of property to Jews, would be 
unique in the world — except for National Socialist 
Germany ? ” 

44 I know that if we bring in an Ordinance to that effect — 
though I wish to point out that nothing has been officially 
decided yet — the Zionists will raise their usual hue and cry, 
using precisely your arguments, Mr. Matthews. But the 
analogy in fact is purely extraneous. Germany has an old- 
established Jewish population, whereas here such a law would 
merely aim at protecting the native population against the 
foreign influx.” 

44 I thought your Government was pledged to establish a 
National Home by means of a 4 close settlement of the Jews 
on the Land 9 ? But I guess I have come to the wrong 
country.” 

The A.Ch.C. looked at his watch. It was the first sign of 
annoyance he had permitted himself, and he at once effaced 
this self-indulgence with a charming smile. 

44 Well — we won't start a legalistic argument, Mr. 
Matthews. The simple truth of the matter is that we have 
to balance the conflicting interests of the two communities. 
We are extremely sorry for the Jews, and it may not be 
irrelevant to point out that in aiding Jewish refugees Great 
Britain has played a larger part than any other country in 
Europe — or outside Europe, if it comes to that. There is, 
for instance, good reason to believe that a considerable pro- 
portion of the Jewish children in Germany whose transfer 
to this country proved not feasible, will shortly be admitted 
to the United Kingdom itself. However, we cannot afford 
to antagonise the Arab world for the sake of the Jews, just 



DAYS OF WRATH 223 

as we could not afford to start a world war for the sake of the 
Czechs. You may say that we have sacrificed the Czechs, 
and I shall answer you that in order to avoid a world- 
conflagration this small sacrifice was justified. We have 
quietly faced the wrath of well-meaning but somewhat 
hot-blooded young men like yourself, and we were called 
names and had a very bad Press — but that was a small price 
to pay for ensuring Europe’s peace for our lifetime. You 
may say and write, Mr. Matthews, that we have no c guts ’ 
— personally I rather dislike the term — but you will have 
to admit that we never lacked the courage to incur momentary 
unpopularity in the interest of lasting good. Our task in this 
country may be ungrateful, but be assured that we shall carry 
it through. We have come to terms with Egypt and Iraq, 
and we have to come to terms with the Arab population in 
this country, on the basis of a reasonable compromise which 
will fully safeguard the rights of the Jewish minority. That 
is the whole issue in a nutshell — and everything else is 
propaganda and rhetoric. . . .” 

There was a short pause ; then Matthews heaved himself 
into an erect position. 

“ Thank you, Mr. Chief Commissioner,” he said. 
“ That’s all I wanted to know. Now we are fixed. I’ve 
listened to your reasonable reasoning which will bring the 
world greater disaster than the ravings of lunatics. So long.” 

He lumbered towards the door. The A.Ch.C. affably 
accompanied him. Then he went back to his armchair. He 
thought it would perhaps be better if he himself wrote to the 
organisers of the tournament to cancel Jimmy’s entry. 

— Well, old man, he thought, to have one leg cut off 
defending Jewish settlements doesn’t seem to satisfy Mr. 
Matthews. What about the second one ? Otherwise he will 
keep on saying that you have lost your guts. 



224 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


6 

Answering Colonel Wedgwood's question , the Colonial Secret- 
ary , Mr. Malcolm MacDonald, said that 1220 illegal immi- 
grants had been prevented from landing in Palestine between 
February 15 and April 15, 1939. 

On March 21, 269 Jews from the steamer Assandu had been 
ordered to return on March 25 to Constanza , their port of 
departure . 710 Jews, of whom 698 were from Germany , 
prevented from landing from s.s. Astir on April 2, awd ordered 
to return. 250 prevented from landing from the ship 

Assimi ora April 11, and the vessel was detained with its 
passengers at Haifa port and ordered to return. 

The Colonial Secretary was then asked by Mr. Noel-Baker 
whether , since the Jewish refugees had suffered appallingly , they 
had been returned when refused permission to land. 

Mr. MacDonald said that they had been returned to their 
ports of embarkation. 

Mr. Noel-Baker : 4 4 Does that mean to concentration camps ? 9 ’ 

Mr. MacDonald : 44 The responsibility rests on those re- 
sponsible for organising illegal immigration 99 

The Minister added that the Government had the fullest 
sympathy with Jewish refugees , but if they allowed one shipload 
more would follow. 

(From the debate in the House of Commons, 
April 26 and 27, 1939) 

Any commanding officer whose ship or boat has hoisted and 
is carrying the proper ensign or appropriate flag may pursue any 
vessel within the territorial waters of Palestine which he believes 
to be carrying intending immigrants and which does not bring-to 
when signalled or required to do so. He may also , after having 
fired a gun as a signal , fire at or into such vessel to compel her 
to bring-to. 

(Amendment to the Immigration Ordinance, 
Gazette Extraordinary , Jerusalem, April 27, 

1939) 



DAYS OF WRATH 


225 


7 

According to his new routine of life, Joseph had spent the 
week-end — that is, Friday afternoon and the Shabbath — 
at home in Ezra's Tower, and had set out on Sunday morning 
to his customary round of duties. 

He got up at half-past three, jumped noiselessly over 
Ellen's sleeping body with his child inside it, ran the hundred 
yards past tower, dining-hut and children’s house to the 
shower-bath, ran back, got dressed, took the imposing 
dispatch-case which went with his office (it had once be- 
longed to the Dr. Phil.), and was just in time to catch the 
milk-truck to Haifa. David the driver was surly and un- 
shaven as usual — he suffered from the national disease, 
duodenal ulcers — so Joseph settled down to sleep in the 
seat next to him and only woke from time to time when a 
jolt sent his head bumping against the side frame of the 
driver’s cabin. But the jolts ceased as they reached the 
metal road, and for a couple of hours there was nothing to 
disturb his sleep. 

He woke, however, as he had intended to, at a particular 
curve a few minutes past Nazareth, where the road emerging 
from the Lower Galilean hills opened on a sudden, breath- 
takingly lovely view over the Valley of Jezreel. To the south 
the valley broadened into a plain about twelve miles wide 
and flat, glistening in the new-born sun — a brilliant chess- 
board with squares of cultivation in dark and lighter green, 
lemon yellow and sienna. The main Afuleh-Jerusalem road 
cut sharp and straight* across the plain, a white arrow in 
flight, pointing at the silvery chalk hills of Samaria which 
embraced the valley in a sweeping semicircle like the walls 
of an amphitheatre. To the west, this distant and hazy 
wall ended in the darker pine slopes of Carmel, falling into 
the pallid sea ; to the east, in the aggressive bulk of Mount 
Gilboa. 

But the distant hills were merely the frame of the picture ; 



226 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

the feast for Joseph’s eyes was the green Valley of Jezreel 
itself, the cradle of the Communes. Twenty years ago a 
desolate marsh cursed with all the Egyptian plagues, it had 
now become a continuous chain of settlements which stretched 
like a string of green pearls across the country’s neck from 
Haifa to the Jordan. It was the proudest achievement of the 
Return, the nucleus of the Hebrew State, the valley of 
valleys. A battlefield throughout the ages, it was grandiose 
even in its geological features, for its eastern part sloped 
down into the deepest inland depression of the earth, four 
hundred feet under sea level. This eastern part was a 
broiling tropical underworld with temperatures surpassing a 
hundred degrees in the shade, and it seemed perverse that the 
oldest of the large Communes — Herod’s Well, House Alpha 
and Josefs Hill — had been set up just in this infernal, 
swampy, disease-ridden and robber-haunted spot. But 
twenty years ago land in those savage marshes had been 
cheap and each square yard of the country had to be bought 
for hard cash ; and the National Fund’s only sources of 
income were charitable donations and the blue collecting- 
boxes which the jet-eyed, curly-haired children of the race 
jingled in the East-Ends from Warsaw to New York ; — 
begging-bowls for the purchase of a kingdom. The race 
proverbial for its financial genius had to buy its national 
home by acres on the instalment plan, and native speculation 
soon drove the price of an acre of desert marsh up to the level 
of a building plot in an industrial town. If this was Jehovah’s 
punishment of the money-changers, the old desert god had 
once more proved his vindictive ingenuity. But this time 
the Colonial Office had outwitted even old Jehovah. No 
more waste land was to be sold to the homeless. The wooden 
plough had to be protected against the noisy tractor, the 
thirsty earth against the artifice of irrigation, the stones on 
the fields against impious removal and the helpless mos- 
quitoes against the cruel draining of their breeding marshes. 
For behold, there was still justice in the world which looked 
after the feeble. 

— A jerk of the lorry woke Joseph from his brooding and 



DAYS OF WRATH 227 

sent his head straight against the roof of the driver’s cabin. 
He was grateful for the pain which cut the bitter stream of 
his thoughts and his cramp of impotent hatred. During the 
last few days it had become almost an obsession. At night, 
when he tried to settle down to sleep, the stream began its 
turgid flow. At first it was only a trickle of phrases, of 
arguments to convince an invisible, impersonal, dumb and 
almighty opponent. Sometimes this opponent appeared as 
the copper-faced Police Major who had visited them on the 
first day ; sometimes it was the whole House of Commons 
whose stilted antics had once enchanted him from the 
Visitors’ Gallery ; sometimes the bear-skinned automaton 
banging his stiff legs down on the gravel in front of Bucking- 
ham Palace. But he could never catch the Speaker’s eye nor 
stop the leg-throwing six-footer marching past ; and as his 
plea remained choked in his throat, its pressure increased and 
the trickle swelled to a torrent, which expanded through his 
whole body until his stomach contracted in a spasm and he 
spat green bile into his handkerchief. I shall either get a 
stomach ulcer, he thought, or join Bauman’s terror gang. 
This is the real alternative. One can reach a point of humilia- 
tion where violence is the only outlet. If I can’t bite, my 
wrath will bite into my own bowels. That’s why our whole 
race is ulcerated in the bloodiest literal sense. Fifteen 
hundred years of impotent anger have gnawed our intestines, 
sharpened our features and twisted down the corners of 
our lips. 

When at last he fell asleep he had no real dreams, only 
half-conscious images of torment. He was sitting in the 
Visitors’ Gallery and shouting down to the Speaker with his 
white wig, but nobody heard his voice and he could never 
catch that beautiful and dignified figure’s eye. He tried to 
bar the bear-skinned Guard’s way, but the six-footer marched 
through him with his banging legs as if Joseph were trans- 
parent air. And once he seemed to hear a suave, cultured 
voice with the accents of his own University : “In the 
interest of peace and order, the honourable Members are 
invited to sit on the drowning men’s heads.” 



228 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

— The nights were bad. But in the morning, instead of 
trying to get in touch with Bauman or Simeon, he would 
get on with his complicated duties as a roving Treasurer 
of the Commune of Ezra’s Tower. The Commune was 
growing rapidly ; a third graft had arrived and Joseph knew 
that for the time being he was indispensable. He longed to 
have a talk with Simeon but both he and Bauman had gone 
underground, and though Joseph knew one end of the chain 
through which he could get in touch with them, he was 
instructed only to do it in case of urgency. He envied them 
for having burnt their bridges, and admired them as a little 
clerk admires the gambler who plays for all or nothing. 
Oh, for the supreme gift of irresponsibility, the gift to 
translate feeling into direct action ! Oh, for the relief of 
having one’s wrath exploded with a good, home-made bomb ! 
The act of killing already appeared to him divested of its 
flesh-tearing, physical aspect, free from the angle of death 
and pain, as an almost platonic act. It was no longer the 
tactile sensation of the mush which had replaced Naphtali’s 
eye, but the clean, impersonal act of aiming at a spark in the 
night. What a luxury to press one’s finger on a hard metal 
trigger and get hanged singing the anthem and have done 
with it — done with the Things to Forget which refused to 
be forgotten and were being repeated on an ever-increasing 
scale with ever more lurid details ; growing on one, growing 
into one, clawing at one’s brain and bowels, while the waving 
hands of the drowned failed to catch the Speaker’s eye. 
There was only one hope of arousing his attention : by the 
report of the bombs which Bauman’s people threw. But that 
was not his, Joseph’s, job. He had to wangle a loan from 
the Settlement Department for a pump to irrigate two hundred 
more dunums ; and two hundred more irrigated dunums 
meant a haven for fifty more families. 

There was only one relief : his week-ends at home. In 
the shadow of Ezra’s Tower the tragedy became almost 
unreal and the only problem was whether the new chicken- 
house should be built first, or the new shower-bath. And 
there was Ellen, a mainstay of the vegetable garden and 



229 


DAYS OF WRATH 

mother of his future child ; and there was Dina. 

The lorry slowly descended among the foothills of Zebu- 
lun into the valley. To their left stood the young Balfour 
Forest with rows of silvery Aleppo pines. They too had been 
planted by the National Fund and were thus intruder trees, 
Jewish trees, each slender stem a thorn in the native patriots* 
eyes who organised raiding parties at night to cut the young 
trees down and dig the saplings out of the earth ; so that 
during the riots bloody battles were fought between the 
Hebrew forest-watchers and the killers of trees. What a 
country, Joseph thought, what a country where each stone 
and tree is bristling with a high-tension charge and cursed 
with archaic memories. Your eye rests on a peaceful Arab 
stone house, but suddenly your brain draws a spark ; for lo, 
you have noticed that one of the stones is part of a Roman 
column broken by the rebel Maccabeans, or the lintel of a 
Byzantine synagogue from Bar Giora’s days. 

— And yet the morning was of a lovely freshness and the 
air sweet with the taste of young apples like the Shulamite’s 
breath. Patterns of wild tulips, iris and cyclamen lay spread 
beneath the slender pines like carpets under young princes* 
feet. Nestling in the woods shone the red roofs of the 
Communes “ Ginegar ” and “ David’s Hill ” ; — the latter 
drawing another painful spark of association, for the David 
in whose honour the Commune was named was not the 
dancing king, but the Welsh statesman under whose premier- 
ship the promise of the Return, now broken, had been given. 

As at each turn of the road more fields and pine woods 
came into sight, the fresh blades of the wheat sparklingly 
aquiver with fat drops of dew, Joseph’s mood rose again and 
his delight with the beauty of the resurrected valley got the 
upper hand. This delight was in him each time he travelled 
through the valley, together with a childish pride. Look, he 
told himself, there is another Hebrew cow munching the 
pasture irrigated from a Hebrew well, and a Hebrew hen 
brooding over her Hebrew eggs — which will doubtless be- 
come infant chicken prodigies. But his self-mockery could 
not erase that jubilant pride of ownership, the joyously insane 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


230 

feeling that everything around here was his own private and 
exclusive creation — including the sows, the hens and the 
flock of sheep coming down the slopes of Ephraim. 

After Nahallal the road drew nearer to the massif of 
Carmel, its soft slopes patchy with tufts of scrub, green 
firs and silvery olive groves. They passed through another 
cluster of Communes with their square white concrete blocks 
and red roofs. There were also some Beduin camps and one 
or two small Arab places in picturesque decay — amidst 
their modern surroundings they looked like reconstructions 
of native villages in some colonial exhibition. 

As they approached the western gateway of the valley, 
there was another wrench for Joseph. To their left, perched 
on a hill, stood the ruins of the great Galilean necropolis and 
one-time seat of the High Court of Israel, the town of Beth 
Shearim, where the survivors of Bar Kochba’s revolt had 
hidden. It was a lonely and nostalgic place, strewn with 
broken columns and honeycombed with burial chambers. 
But the hallowed site was now named after some obscure 
Moslem saint called Sheikh Abreik, whose shrine happened 
to be in the vicinity. . . . 

Come now, Joseph nudged himself, we are getting rather 
like the Irish — or the Welsh who deplore that all cities on 
the isles haven’t got names with fifteen consonants on a string. 
But then, nationalism is only comic in others — like being 
seasick or in love. Oh, well, he thought, a people fighting 
for survival can’t afford a sense of humour. That’s perhaps 
why we lose our renowned wit when we return to the Land. 
To think that we have over a hundred Hebrew periodicals 
and dailies, but not a single comic paper ! This is an 
essentially humourless country. Hebrew doesn’t lend itself 
to stories about two Jews in a railway compartment — it is 
an angry tongue. 

The road was now closely hugging the slope of Carmel ; 
to their right opened the plain of Acco, littered with factories 
and oil refineries ; beyond it, one could catch glimpses of 
the yellow dunes and the glassy expanse of the sea. The 
nearness of the great port made itself felt in the dense traffic 



DAYS OF WRATH 231 

on the road in spite of the early hour ; there were Arab 
buses loaded like Noah’s Ark, and Hebrew buses shabby and 
workmanlike, and camels and donkeys and petrol trucks. At 
last, shortly after seven o’clock, they passed the old railway 
station in the Arab suburb of Haifa, where one of Bauman’s 
bombs had killed forty people a few weeks ago. 


8 

Topmost in Joseph’s dispatch-case lay the weekly shopping 
list for his household of a hundred and fifty people. 

The wholesale offices of the Co-operative were down-town 
in the new business centre and were more like a debating 
club than a shop. Joseph placed his orders for a sack of sugar 
and the required quantities of spaghetti, rice and tea, then 
took an autobus which took him uphill to the Hebrew quarter 
“ Glory of the Carmel ”, As it climbed the steep serpentine 
road, the view over the sparkling bay expanded, and the edge 
of the sea widened its circle and was lifted higher, keeping 
level with the ascent of the bus. The harbour shrank and 
the yellow dunes with their wavering white surf-line stretched 
out to the horizon. The curved massif of the Carmel was 
hugging the bay in its protecting elbow ; near its bend the 
breakwater jutted out and the glassy sea was dotted with 
steamers and fishing boats. A little further out a single ship 
with a black hull rode at anchor, isolated from the rest. It 
was the Rumanian cattle steamer Assimi with two hundred 
and fifty refugees on board, who had been refused per- 
mission to land. 

Half-way up the Carmel, Joseph got out of the bus and 
continued his shopping. He had discovered a cheap grocer of 
Lithuanian origin, a bearded little man wearing a skull-cap, 
who had located the ten lost tribes of Israel in the Caucasus 
and found each week a new proof for his theory, so that it 
took Joseph half an hour to buy a hundredweight of dried 
apples, which, Dasha maintained, were essential for the 



232 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

vitamin diet of the under-nourished arrivals in the new draft. 
The rest of the morning went on the acquisition of ten cubic 
metres of timber for the Commune's carpentry shop (they 
were now producing their own furniture at Ezra's Tower), 
three sheets of leather for the shoe shop, whose smell gave 
him a nostalgic pang for the good old days, and various tools 
and spare parts for the tractor. 

He lunched heretically in a small Arab eating-house 
where the food was cheap, dirty and tasty, and whose fat pro- 
prietor confidentially informed him that Hitler, Protector of 
Islam, would soon destroy the British Empire, restore the 
country to the Arabs and drive the Jews into the sea — 
except Joseph himself who, being the proprietor's friend and 
an educated person, would be spared and might even get a 
job in the establishment, provided he brought some capital 
with him. 

He lingered over the sweet, strong coffee, striking off the 
finished tasks from his crammed notebook ; then, in the 
damp midday heat, started once more on his rounds. He 
bought plywood and shoe polish, sun-glasses and contra- 
ceptives, toothbrushes and insecticides for the Communal 
stores, took the Dr. Phil.'s spectacles to an optician, and as 
a special treat visited Ringart's bookshop from which he 
emerged, after an hour's browsing, with a three-piastre 
pamphlet on combating tomato pests for the Communal 
Library. By then it was dark and his jangling nerves told 
him that there was a khamsin in the air. For some unknown 
reason he was worried about Dina, though when he had last 
seen her she had been neither better nor worse. Perhaps it 
was only because he knew how badly the spring khamsins 
affected her. And anyway, there was nothing to be done 
about Dina. 

He had supper in the Workers' Club, listened to a lecture 
on the new Russian theatre, and went, very tired, to the cheap 
lodging-house where he always stayed in Haifa. It was a 
dirty, bug-ridden place run by an orthodox Polish Jew. 
Here he had to share a room, with no furniture except the 
beds in it, with three others. However, his room-mates were 



DAYS OF WRATH 


233 


not yet in, and by the time they arrived he was asleep. 

The next morning he took a couple of hours off to attend 
the hearing of a case of illegal immigration in the Magistrate’s 
Court, about which there had been some talk in the Co- 
operative Office. 

He had never been to a Magistrate’s Court before and 
was surprised by the lack of ceremony in the proceedings, 
the bleakness of the court-room and the informal, almost 
familiar atmosphere prevailing in it. There were about 
twelve to fifteen rows of benches, on which policemen and 
civilians, Jews and Arabs sat mixed together, with the sleepy 
expression of schoolboys when the sun shines outside. 
Facing them on a dais sat the Magistrate, Mr. Wilmot, a 
dry, elderly man with an absent-minded air. The dais was 
only a few inches high, but the table in front of the Magistrate 
had a marble top, which was the only solemn thing in the 
room. To the left of the dais were two separate benches at 
right angles to the others, representing the dock. 

When Joseph entered the room, an old, bleary-eyed Arab 
with a red tarbush was standing in the dock and making an 
excited speech to the Magistrate, who stared dreamily at his 
nails. In front of the dais stood an English Police sergeant 
listening to the Arab’s speech with a righteous and sour smile. 
Gradually it became clear that the sergeant had charged the 
Arab with cruelty to his mule. The mule was covered with 
sores caused by a skin disease and the sergeant had obtained 
a previous injunction against the Arab prohibiting the use 
of the mule until it was cured from its disease ; however, 
at the date specified in the charge, the sergeant had seen the 
mule standing before the Arab’s cart, which was heavily 
loaded with durra, near the Arab’s hut up on Mount Carmel. 
The Arab, on the other hand, offered to bring ten witnesses 
who would swear that the mule had not worked for the last 
three weeks ; and nobody in the audience doubted that he 
would be able to bring them. 

When the Arab paused for breath, Mr. Wilmot, the 
Magistrate, seemed to wake up. “ Ask him,” he said in a 

Q 



234 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

small, dry voice to the interpreter, “ whether he thinks that 
the sergeant was telling lies.” The Arab raised both arms in 
protest ; he had never said such a thing. 

“ Then he admits that he used the mule with the cart ? ” 
asked Mr. Wilmot. Again the Arab protested. “ But that's 
what the sergeant says,” said the Magistrate. The Arab was 
silent for a while, then he burst into a new torrent of speech. 

“ He says,” the interpreter repeated grinning, “ that it is 
true that the mule stood before the cart, but he says it wasn't 
harnessed to the cart.” 

“ Then why did he put it there ? ” asked Mr. Wilmot. 

“ He says,” said the interpreter, “ that this is a free 
country and he can put the mule where he likes.” 

“ Fifty piastres or two days,” said the Magistrate. The 
sergeant smiled contentedly and the Arab was led out, 
protesting. 

The next case was that of a young Beduin from Trans- 
jordan, charged with contravening the Traffic Regulations 
by persisting in riding his camel on the wrong side of the 
road. He was fined ten piastres and produced contemptu- 
ously a five-pound note which the Clerk could not change ; 
they walked out of the court, shouting at each other. 

Mr. Wilmot fumbled among his papers. 

“ Brod — etsky, Wilhelm,” he read out. “ Illegal immi- 
gration. . . , Where is he ? ” 

In the row in front of Joseph there was a stir. An Arab 
policeman rose and nudged a thin little man with an ear- 
trumpet who was sitting beside him. He had already aroused 
Joseph’s curiosity by fidgeting incessantly with his trumpet 
and craning his neck to hear what was going on. His neck 
was long and thin like a scrofulous child’s. He rose hurriedly, 
squeezed past the Arabs sitting in his row and walked with 
quick, jerky steps behind the policeman to the dock. 

“ Is he represented ? ” asked the Magistrate. 

A tall, pale man had risen in the front row. “ I am 
representing him, your Worship,” he said. 

“ Ah, Mr. Weinstein,” the Magistrate said drily. “ As 
usual.” 



DAYS OF WRATH 


235 


“ As usual, your Worship.” 

For a silent second the Magistrate and Weinstein looked 
at each other. Mr. Wilmot’s eyes were vague. Weinstein’s 
were equally expressionless ; he looked haggard and ill. 
Brodetsky in the dock craned his neck and held the trumpet 
to his ear. 

“ Was ist los ? ” he cried suddenly. “ Was will man van 
mir ? ” 

“ Tell him to wait until he is questioned,” the Magistrate 
said, turning over his papers. 

Weinstein crossed to the dock and spoke loudly into the 
trumpet : 

“ Sie mussen warten , Herr Brodetsky . Geduld .” 

Brodetsky nervously jerked his shoulders, “ Geduld , 
Geduld ,” he repeated, probably to himself. 

After establishing the defendant’s name, age, place of 
birth and profession — questions which Brodetsky answered 
readily, even eagerly — Mr. Wilmot proceeded to read out 
the charge, according to which the accused person had, on 
the date specified, arrived in territorial waters on board the 
Rumanian cattle ship Assimi carrying two hundred and fifty- 
one persons without immigration permits. The vessel had 
been intercepted by coastal patrol and ordered to return with 
its passengers to its Rumanian port of origin, but permitted 
to take food, drinking water and medical supplies, as epi- 
demics had broken out on board. Under cover of night, 
while the detained vessel was riding at anchor in Haifa port, 
the accused person had jumped overboard and swum ashore, 
thereby entering the country without permission contrary to 
the Immigration Ordinance of 1933. He had been found 
lying unconscious on the beach by an Arab watchman and 
handed over to the Police. 

“ Does he plead guilty or not guilty ? ” the Magistrate 
asked. 

“ Not guilty — as usual,” said Weinstein. He looked at 
the Magistrate with the same look of cool, concentrated 
hatred which Joseph had often seen in Simeon’s eyes. 

During the evidence of the night watchman and the Police 



236 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

witnesses, Brodetsky kept on fidgeting. He alternatively held 
the trumpet to his ear and tried to arouse the attention of his 
lawyer, who stood with his back to the dock. His eyes were 
shifting restlessly along the rows of the audience as if asking 
for support, but seemed unable to focus on any single face. 
In the momentary pause when the Police witness had finished 
his deposition, he suddenly pulled his lawyer's sleeve and 
explained something to him with frantic gestures. 

“ What does he say ? " asked the Magistrate. 

“ He says he has been boxed on the ear and cannot hear 
well." 

“ By whom ? ” 

“ By a guard in Dachau." 

“ I don't see the connection with the charge." 

“ No, your Worship." Weinstein looked as if he were 
going to add something, but did not. 

The defendant again explained something in great 
agitation. 

“ What is it now ? " 

“ He says the battery of his hearing apparatus slipped 
from him while he swam in the sea and he asks to be pro- 
vided with a new battery." 

Brodetsky hopefully held out his battered ear-trumpet 
towards the Magistrate, with a shrug to indicate that it was 
useless. The Magistrate met his eyes for a second, then 
reverted to the papers in his file. “ Tell him that will have 
to be dealt with later," he said without looking up. 

The barrister turned to the defendant who obediently 
replaced the trumpet to his ear, “ Spater ," he shouted into 
the trumpet. 

“ Spater , spater” Brodetsky repeated to himself, shrug- 

pag- 

“ Ask him whether he wants to make any statement 
bearing on the case." 

“ Wunschen Sie etwas zu sagen ? " Weinstein shouted. 

“ Sagen ? Sagen ? Ich will zu meinem Neffen . Was ist 
hier los ? " Brodetsky said nervously. 

“ He says that he wants to see his nephew and he 



DAYS OF WRATH 237 

keeps asking for what reason he has been brought to this 
room.” 

The Magistrate looked at Weinstein. 

“You have explained the charge to him ? ” 

“ Repeatedly,” said Weinstein. 

“ He was mentally examined and found in a state of 
nervous tension, but sane,” said Mr. Wilmot, turning over 
his papers. 

“ Yes, your Worship.” Weinstein hesitated for a second, 
then said in a flat monotone : “ The desire on the part of a 
person escaping from danger of life to find refuge with the 
only surviving member of his family can hardly be inter- 
preted as a sign of mental insanity.” 

After a moment’s silence the Magistrate said : 

“ The nephew referred to lives at . . . ? ” 

“ He is employed by the Potash Company on the Dead 
Sea.” 

“ Is he in the audience ? ” 

“ No. He is in hospital with malaria.” 

“ Everybody always seems to be in hospital with malaria,’ 
Mr. Wilmot said in a mutter. He suddenly closed the file 
with a determined gesture and leant back in his chair. 

“ Well, I am listening to the Prosecution.” 

The Prosecutor, a tall, well-groomed Christian Arab who 
had so far taken little part in the proceedings, began to talk 
before he had completely risen to his feet, and had finished 
within two minutes. He summed up the evidence, quoted 
the text of the Immigration Ordinance, and demanded that 
the accused person be sentenced to six months’ imprison- 
ment with a recommendation to be subsequently deported. 
He spoke a careful English and gave the impression of 
repeating a daily routine performance. 

After him it was Weinstein’s turn. He spoke in a de- 
liberately colourless voice. He referred to the known facts 
of persecution in Germany, Austria and Czechoslovakia 
which gave those who succeeded in escaping no other choice 
but to cross as quickly as possible any frontier they could 
reach. However, even if they managed to evade the frontier 



238 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

patrols, they found no safety on the other side, as most 
European countries had brought in legislation against this 
undesirable influx, and they remained under the constant 
threat of arrest and expulsion. It was thus inevitable that 
they should try by any means to reach the shores of the 
country which by international agreement had been granted 
to them as a National Home, and which was their only 
remaining hope. Hunted by the Police, without passports 
or legal residence, it was materially impossible for them to 
follow the regular procedure, that is to apply for an immi- 
gration permit and wait for probably a year or two until their 
turn on the quota came. Under these circumstances to dis- 
tinguish between “ legal ” and “ illegal ” immigrants became 
a mockery. 

“ If I have a madman at my heels,” he went on in his 
colourless voice, “ and I see an autobus passing, I shall 
jump onto the platform regardless of traffic regulations. I 
leave it to your Worship to decide whether the bus conductor 
would be right in pushing me off the platform because I 
boarded the vehicle outside the prescribed stop.” 

He paused, wound up with the plea that these aspects of 
the case should be taken into consideration by the Court, sat 
down and swallowed two pills from a little box in his waist- 
coat pocket, looking iller than ever. 

Brodetsky bent in great excitement over his lawyer's 
shoulder. “ Was ist los ? ” he asked. 

Weinstein cleared his throat and bent to the trumpet. 
“ Geduld” he said. 

“ Was, was ? ” said Brodetsky, looking questioningly to 
the audience. 

After some more technicalities Mr. Wilmot rose, patiently 
waiting until Brodetsky had been persuaded to keep silent. 

“ As always in these cases,” he said, looking at nobody in 
particular, “ I say again that it is my duty as a Magistrate to 
use the penalties which I am empowered to inflict in order to 
restrain, as far as may be, those who are contemplating similar 
offences.” 

He looked at the accused man, who was now bobbing up 



DAYS OF WRATH 239 

and down on his toes in soundless excitement ; then again 
averted his eyes. 

“ I am sensitive to the truth of what Mr. Weinstein said,” 
he went on, looking at the barrister, “ that the conditions in 
certain countries in Europe have caused what one may call a 
stampede of the mass of the persecuted out of those terri- 
tories, and that in these circumstances deterrent punishment 
can have little effect. However, it is incumbent upon me to 
endeavour to exercise my discretion so that, if possible, such 
deterrent effect may be produced.” 

He made a pause, cleared his throat and went on, speaking 
with a marked deliberation : 

“ It is possible that I am wrong and that such cases should 
be dealt with differently. I hope this case will be taken to 
appeal and I should like to have a direction in this matter 
from a higher court.” 

He had been looking at Weinstein, but now turned 
deliberately to the defendant, who was craning his neck with 
the trumpet to his ear. 

“ For the above reasons I sentence the accused person to 
three months* imprisonment from the day of arrest, and shall 
recommend to His Excellency the High Commissioner that 
he be deported.* * 

There was a silence, and then once more Brodetsky’s 
voice ringing out : 

“ Was ist los ? Was ist los ? ” 

Weinstein talked to him while the Court rose, trying to 
persuade him to follow peacefully his escort. But Brodetsky 
refused to budge and shouted more and more loudly that he 
could not wait any longer and wished to go at once and live 
with his nephew. He finally was half dragged, half carried 
out by two Arab policemen, trying to hang on to his lawyer’s 
sleeve and yelling in a shrill, sobbing voice : 

“ Was ist los ? Was ist los ? Was hah * ich getan ? ” 

Joseph walked out of the Court. Downstairs at the gate 
Weinstein passed him with an unlit cigarette between his lips 
which was moving up and down from a nervous tic. He 
was absent-mindedly fumbling in his pockets for a match. 



240 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Joseph gave him a light, addressing him in Hebrew. 

“ Thank you,” said Weinstein. His face was yellow and 
his hands slightly shaking. 

“ Are you going to appeal ? ” Joseph asked. 

“ What ? ” said Weinstein. “ Oh yes, as usual.” His 
eyes, which again reminded Joseph of Simeon’s, focussed on 
Joseph’s dispatch-case. 

“ Are you a clerk ? ” he asked. 

“ No — I am from a Settlement.” 

“ Settlement,” Weinstein repeated. His cigarette was still 
twitching up and down. “ And what are you carrying 
there ? ” 

“ Papers,” said Joseph. 

“ . . . Papers,” Weinstein repeated. “ We are all carry- 
ing papers. Perhaps we should be carrying revolvers.” 

He smiled distractedly and walked off with a slightly 
limping gait, clutching his dispatch-case to his side. 

Luckily Joseph had so much to do that he found no time 
for brooding. His tasks as a communal purveyor having been 
finished the previous day, except for those items which he 
could only get in Tel Aviv or Jerusalem, he now had to 
embark on his more tedious duties as a money-raiser, diplo- 
matist and wangler. They included a protracted argument 
with the District Manager of the Workers’ Sick Fund to get 
the people of Ezra’s Tower graded into a higher health- and 
lower premium-category ; negotiations with the Workers’ 
Bank for the prolongation of a promissory note ; and making 
a row at the Committee of Culture and Education about the 
inferior quality of the last three lecturers they had sent. 

To appease Joseph, the Secretary of the Committee gave 
him a free ticket to the Eden Cinema. It was a rare treat, for 
living on the Communal purse, Joseph could not find it in 
his heart to go to a show, though he was entitled to do so 
once a fortnight. He arrived at the cinema after the per- 
formance had started, watched the entry of the German 
troops into Prague, followed the first stages of a young 
heiress’ tragic struggles to become, against her parents’ wish, 



DAYS OF WRATH 241 

the world ice-skating champion, and fell asleep. When he 
woke, the heiress had just broken an ankle and was being 
carried away in an ambulance, so Joseph pushed his way out 
and walked back to his lodging-house. 

This time his room-mates were already in their beds. 
One of them snored and a second, apparently a new arrival 
from Europe, kept on begging in his sleep, in a high, piping 
voice, that somebody should stop doing something to him : 
after which he counted up to ten, each number followed by 
a jerk and a groan. Joseph woke him and gave him a glass 
of water ; but after a while the man again fell asleep and 
again started counting. Joseph resigned himself to watching 
the plaster flaking from the ceiling and the cockroaches creep- 
ing over the floor, in the yellow light of the shadeless electric 
bulb. 'From outside came the slow beat of the tide in the 
harbour where the Assimi rode at anchor with her two hundred 
and fifty passengers on board, including eighty women and 
children. 

At last Joseph fell asleep. He was woken again after a 
few hours by the wailing of the Assimi ' s siren. He was 
angry, for just at the moment of being woken up he had been 
on the point of making his voice heard and catching at last 
the white- wigged Speaker’s eye. The room was dim ; it 
was still very early. The snorer in the next bed snored, but 
the man who had counted to ten had calmed down ; he lay 
on his stomach with one arm hanging over the side of the bed, 
his open mouth burrowed into the pillow. The fourth bed, 
which had been occupied by an old man with a beard, 
was empty. 

The siren wailed a second time and Joseph jumped from 
his bed and crossed to the window. Under the window there 
was a shapeless crouching figure wrapped in a black-and- 
white praying scarf which he had drawn hood-like over his 
head, with the tassels hanging over his eyes. He was 
balancing on his heels, forward and back in the traditional 
rocking movement of prayer, while his fist rhythmically beat 
his chest. Through the window, down in the harbour, the 
mast-tops of the Assimi could be seen slowly moving past the 



242 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

long breakwater towards the open sea, followed by a swarm 
of circling seagulls ; carrying its passengers towards the 
sunny Mediterranean and the various forms of death awaiting 
them. The hooded figure was mumbling and swaying on 
his heels ; the crown of his head was littered with small black 
flakes : he must have burned some paper to obtain ashes, as 
befits the occasion of the prayer for the dead. 


9 

The first intimation of the impending disaster reached the 
Hebrew Community on Sunday , February 26. According to 
London agency reports published by the Hebrew and Arabic 
Press , the British Government had submitted to the delegates of 
the Round Table Conference its proposals for the transformation 
of Palestine into an independent Arab state , and for further 
prohibitive measures against the immigration of Jews, who were 
for all time to remain a minority not exceeding one-third of the 
total population . 

The Round Table Conference had opened in St. James's 
Palace on February 2, 1939, with an address of welcome by 
Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain . The Palestine Arabs , the 
majority of whom belonged to the fugitive Mufti' s party , refused 
to sit at the same table with the Hebrew delegation . The British 
Government , endorsing their attitude , split the conference into 
two parallel Anglo- Arab and Anglo-Hebrew conferences. The 
Hebrew delegation demanded the continuation of the British 
Mandate and of Jewish immigration according to the country's 
economic absorptive capacity . The Arab delegation demanded 
abrogation of the Mandate and of the Balfour Declaration , the 
banning of Jewish immigration and the prohibition of the pur- 
chase of land by Jews. After about a fortnight's deadlock 
the British Government was now reported to have issued its 
proposals which accepted in substance the Arab demands. 

On the same day the London newspapers also reported that 
the Government had endorsed the Spanish insurgents' demand 



DAYS OF WRATH 243 

for immediate recognition . Certain sections of the Press com- 
mented that the British Government trusted General Franco's 
generosity and his promise to avoid reprisals against the 
Loyalists . The same newspapers expressed the opinion that 
Arab generosity was to be the best guarantee for the rights of the 
Jewish minority . 

Coincident with these reports came the news of the erection 
of a concrete security wall round the Jewish quarter of the Old 
City of Jerusalem, of the murder of a popular Hebrew teacher in 
the vicinity of Solomon's Pool, of the explosion of yet more 
bombs in the Hebrew centres of Haifa and Jerusalem, and of 
jubilant Moslem demonstrations hailing the Mufti and Mr. 
Chamberlain . 

While the usual terror acts continued, the Jewish representa- 
tive bodies issued their usual protests against “ the planned 
liquidation of the National Home and its handing over to the 
rule of the gang leaders " ; and their President, the aged and 
venerable Professor of Organic Chemistry, urged as usual 
restraint in the face of disaster. However, a considerable section 
of the Hebrew youth had by that time become convinced that 
restraint was not the proper answer to disaster. For twenty 
years they had practised loyalty and restraint, and were now on 
the point of losing everything ; whereas their opponents had 
practised rebellion and violence, and were to be rewarded by the 
granting of all their demands. 

The controversy over the question of the use of violence had 
already some time ago led to a split in the ranks of the Hebrew 
defence organisation. The old organisation, “ Haganah ", con- 
trolled by the Jewish official bodies and socialist in outlook y 
adhered to the principle of passive defence ; it was tolerated by 
the Government to whom it had given valuable help in crushing 
the Arab rebellion. The new organisation , “ Irgun ", was 
numerically smaller and organised on the conspiratorial lines of 
a terrorist underground movement. Its members were extreme 
nationalists in outlook, derided the impotence of the Jewish 
official bodies, were denounced as fascists by their old comrades 
of the “ Haganah ", and hunted by the Police. They had secret 
wireless transmitters and printing presses, a considerable stock 



244 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

of arms , and sympathisers in all layers of the Hebrew population 
including the Police Force and Government Departments. Their 
leaders were two students of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, 
both in their twenties : “ Razi ”, alias David Raziel , a Bible 
scholar , later killed in action serving with the British Forces , at 
that time interned in the concentration camp of Sarafand ; and 
“ Yair ", alias Abraham Stern , a poet, later killed by the Police 
while trying to escape arrest . 

On Monday, February 27 , twenty -four hours after publica- 
tion of the British Government's proposals, the “ Irgun ” struck. 

In the early morning hours of that day, the secret wireless 
transmitter, “ Voice of Fighting Zion ”, announced that “ puni- 
tive military actions are being carried out at this hour simul- 
taneously in all the bigger towns and on the roads of the country. 
These punitive actions of our forces should serve as a warning 
to Arab terrorists who committed atrocities during the last 
thirty-two months against the Hebrew community ; to the 
British Government, which has broken its solemn pledges and 
closed the gates of the Land of Israel ; to the world at large, 
which has so far done nothing to prevent the slaughter of our 
kin." 

It was not an empty boast. Simultaneously at the indicated 
hour, bombs and land mines exploded and volleys were fired in 
the Arab quarters of Jerusalem, Jaffa, Haifa and Sarafand ; 
cars were assaulted, rails blown up and trains derailed all over 
the country. Arab casualties during that one hour equalled the 
Hebrew casualties during the last three months. 

The action had started everywhere at 6.30 a.m. and was 
over by 7.30 a.m. No member of the “ Irgun " was caught by 
the Police. At 8.30 a.m. General Bernard Montgomery , Com- 
mander of the Haifa District, had the streets of the town cleared 
by armoured cars with loudspeaker vans who ordered everybody 
home. A daylight curfew was imposed until the next morning. 

A few hours later the Colonial Secretary , Mr. Malcolm 
MacDonald, made a statement in the House of Commons. In 
lieu of the expected official confirmation of the Government's 
proposals as released to the Press the day before , the Colonial 
Secretary appealed to the public in “ England and Palestine 



DAYS OF WRATH 


245 

. . . to withhold judgement until an authoritative statement 
could be made The Colonial Secretary also regretted that 
“ incomplete and in some important respects misleading reports 
of the Government s intentions had gone to Palestine where they 
had been the cause of serious incidents ”. Pressed by the Leader 
of the Opposition for a statement “ to prevent further misleading 
ideas ”, Mr . MacDonald said that “ after what had takenplace 
in Palestine any further statement would be undesirable 

It looked as if for the moment at least , disaster had been 
averted . The bombs and land mines had spoken in the only 
language which , anno domini 1939, the world understood . A 
few hours later the Prime Minister confirmed the unconditional 
recognition of General Franco's Junta as the legitimate govern- 
ment in Spain . His announcement was received with cries of 
“ Shame ” ; one member shouted : “ You should be impeached 
as a traitor to Great Britain" 


10 

The khamsin is a hot, dry, easterly wind blowing from the 
Arabian desert. The name is of Egyptian origin and signifies 
“ fifty ” — the fifty days between Easter and Pentecost on 
which the khamsin is said to be particularly frequent. 

As with its kin : sirocco and foehn, borah and mistral* 
the khamsin’s effect on the humours of man is violent and 
mysterious. Its intensity varies from a tepid breeze, im- 
portunate like an unwanted caress, to the scalding whiff from 
an open boiler. But it is not the surface effect of the moving 
air which counts ; nor its heat ; nor the thirst, the irking 
dryness in throat and nostrils. What matters is the kham- 
sin’s nervous effect, and the things which it does to those 
functions of the body which are beyond voluntary control. 

There are no statistics on the increase of suicide, man- 
slaughter and rape on khamsin days. Its influence on the 
nervous system cannot be expressed in measurable quantities* 



246 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Measurable are only the physical changes in the atmos- 
phere. It is known that the temperature close to the ground 
may jump upward during a khamsin by 35 degrees and pass 
no degrees in the shade. The relative humidity of the air 
may drop to one-seventh of the normal and come within 
2 per cent of absolute dryness. The electrical conductivity 
of the air may increase to twenty times its normal value, 
while its radio-activity may increase two to threefold. But 
what do these measurements reveal ? Not much, except 
perhaps the fact that man is subjected to the moods of 
Nature in more and subtler ways than he is wont to imagine. 
His apparent dominion over her is purely external ; as 
Gulliver was tied in his sleep by the Lilliputians, so he 
remains attached to the blind forces by a web of thin, in- 
visible threads tied to his solar plexus, the para-sympathetic 
ganglia, the electrical charge of his nerve-sheaths, the vaso- 
regulators of his endocrine glands. A clumsy slave who 
imagines himself master because his chains have been 
replaced by a silken strait-jacket. 

The sky on khamsin days over Ezra’s Tower is leaden 
grey with high vapour and desert dust. On the slope facing 
Kfar Tabiyeh the twigs of the young pines move in a soft, 
rain-heralding way in the mute air ; but there will be no rain. 
The liberating thunder seems on the tip of Nature’s tongue ; 
but she sticks her tongue out at you and there will be no 
storm. There is a protracted expectation and frustration in 
the sulphuric air ; like Messalina’s long, tormenting embrace 
it excites but refuses relief ; a panting, suffocating ascent 
which never reaches its climax, A storm is brewing within 
arm’s reach, brewing inside people’s ears and ribs, which will 
never discharge itself. 

The day after Joseph had left for Haifa, the khamsin was 
particularly bad. Dina had spent the evening trying to read, 
while Sarah, with whom she shared her room, was discussing 
with Max an article in the Hebrew I.L.P. paper about how 
to help the emancipation of the Arab woman. Sarah thought 



DAYS OF WRATH 247 

that the best way was a frontal attack on religion. Max 
thought that the question of the veil and birth-control 
should come first. Sarah thought that the main obstacle was 
the Arab fear of Hebrew domination. Max thought that 
they should renounce any claim to dominate in a solemn de- 
claration. Sarah thought that Bauman’s gang were Fascist 
criminals. Max thought that they were discrediting the 
whole movement and should be handed over to the Police. 
Sarah thought that it was the human approach to the Arabs 
which counted. Max agreed that the human approach had 
not been carried sufficiently far. At this point Dina un- 
expectedly started to scream. Max looked at her, bewildered, 
along his drooping tapir-nose. “Oh, go away,” she screamed, 
stamping her feet, “go, go away all of you and leave me 
alone. ...” 

She tried to control herself, biting her lips and pushing 
the hair out of her face. “ Are you ill ? ” Max asked, 
bending towards her, and sniffing sympathetically. But 
Dina suddenly hit out at his chest with her fist, and while 
Max stumbled back, she ran out of the room. 

It was hot and there was nobody outside. The khamsin 
caught her from behind ; it felt as if somebody were blowing 
on the nape of her neck with a hot, foul breath. Behind the 
tower the rust-coloured moon hung motionless on a greyish 
gauze of mist ; it looked like a clot on a soiled bandage. She 
hurried across the Square and past the dining-hut where 
some meeting was on ; the hum of the all too well-known 
voices came out floating on the hot breeze like a swarm of 
insistent flies. She hurried on through the married living 
quarters with its square white concrete blocks. The door 
of Joseph’s room stood open and the room was brightly lit. 
On the bed, facing the door, Ellen, Gaby and the Egyptian 
were sitting side by side. Ellen, with her swollen belly, was 
leaning back on the bed and reading out something from a 
magazine, and they all three laughed. The Egyptian had 
his arm round Gaby’s shoulder ; her leg was pressed against 
his from knee to ankle. 

Lifting her eyes from the magazine, Ellen saw Dina’s 



248 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

slender figure silhouetted against the darkness ; she called 
out to her, but the figure moved on as if frightened. 

Once outside the circle of light, Dina hesitated for a 
second whether she should turn back and join the company 
of the others. But the idea of sitting still in that cramped, 
narrow cubicle with its stuffy air and the bodily odours of 
Joseph and Ellen lingering on the bed, made her hurry 
on again. It seemed to her that she knew not only all their 
voices by heart but also the individual smell of their perspira- 
tions. There was an itching dryness inside the hot shell of 
her nostrils ; for a while the world seemed to consist of smells 
alone, floating in the air like threads of various colour. 
There was the greasy whiff of tepid dishwater from the 
communal kitchen, the sour-milk smell of the nursery, the 
acid smell of the sheep-pen, the biting ammonia of the men’s 
urinary, the sickly-sweet odour of indisposed women. When 
a small child she could always tell when her grown-up sister 
or her friends were unwell. She closed her eyes and scratched 
frantically with her sharp finger-nail in the dry cavity of her 
nose. At last she had discovered what she was going to do ; 
sobbing and biting her nails, she burst into the stable-shed 
and groped her way in the hay-warm darkness towards 
Salome’s box. 

The brown mare was asleep, but as soon as Dina’s hand 
touched her flank she scrambled to her feet with a docile and 
plaintive neigh. Dina found the stable lantern and a box of 
matches ; while she put the saddle on the horse she felt 
suddenly quite cheerful. She had gone out on night rides 
several times before when a similar mood had come over 
her ; and though lately snipers had again taken occasional 
pot-shots at the settlement in the dark, wounding two people, 
and it was not considered safe to walk alone outside the 
entrenchment at night, this only gave an additional thrill to 
her undertaking. She extinguished the lantern and led 
Salome quietly out of the shed and past the rows of tents of 
the youth camp. A moment later she had reached the barbed 
wire and passed through the gate. She looked round, but 
there was nobody to see her ; she gave Salome a pat on the 



DAYS OF WRATH 


249 

flank, planted her left foot firmly into the stirrup and with 
an elastic jump, mounted. She would have liked to go for 
a wild gallop but the moon was not bright enough, and if 
she broke a leg of the communal mare she might as well 
commit suicide at once. They had a way of unctuous forgive- 
ness in such cases which made one feel a leper for weeks. 
It delighted her that she was doing something definitely 
“ a-social ” and naughty ; and that, as Salome couldn’t tell 
tales, nobody would know a thing about it. 

As she walked the horse down the slope on the farther 
side of Kfar Tabiyeh, the hills around her looked as if dipped 
into a silver bath. Their silence gave her an unearthly 
feeling. From the height of Salome’s back even the khamsin 
felt like a warm, impersonal caress. She decided to ride 
straight down into the wadi, follow its course and then take 
the path up the opposite hill to the Ancestor’s Cave. 

However, as she reached the bottom of the slope and rode 
through the narrow, twisting bed of the wadi strewn with 
boulders and dry thistles and tufts of scrub, a sense of 
oppression came over her. The slopes now rose on both 
sides over her head ; she could no longer dominate them with 
her view. Salome was carefully picking her way among the 
rubble and could not be induced to go quicker. There was 
no sound except the dry crunching of her hooves and the 
occasional screech of her slipping on a stone. Dina thought 
longingly of the noises in the far-away dining-hut and of the 
bright light streaming through the door of Joseph’s room. 
The hills had withdrawn into themselves ; there was an ait 
of refusal about them, the exhalation of an immense loneli- 
ness. She was on the point of admitting defeat and turn- 
ing Salome’s head, when at a sudden twist of the wadi she 
saw a man in Arab dress walking steadily towards her. 

Something in his gait and clothing told her that he was one 
of the villagers from Kfar Tabiyeh. At the first moment the 
man seemed as startled as she was and stopped uncertainly 
about twenty yards in front of her ; then, probably per- 
ceiving that she was a woman, he resumed his walk and came 
steadily closer. To turn back now would have meant 

R 



250 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

admitting that she was scared ; she pressed her heels into 
Salome’s flank and rode on. She could not induce the horse 
to walk quicker on the slippery rubble, nor did the man 
hasten his steps, so that the few yards which were still be- 
tween them seemed to drag on for minutes. She now saw 
that he wore a kefiyeh with a black cord and a striped Arab 
skirt with a checked European jacket. When at last they 
were level he stepped aside and looked up at her, silent and 
open-mouthed. She could see the gap of two missing front 
teeth in the dark cavity of his mouth and the blind, milky 
pupil of one eye destroyed by trachoma. When she had 
passed him he said something which she couldn’t understand 
in a hoarse voice and, after a moment’s hesitation, turned and 
began to follow her. But now there was a clean stretch of 
path before her, and Salome, suddenly frightened, broke of 
her own accord into a gallop. When Dina turned her head 
after a minute, there was nothing behind her but the empty 
wadi, deserted between the silver hills. 

Her heart-beat became normal again as soon as she found 
herself on the ascending path to the Ancestor’s chamber ; 
only her thighs, locked round Salome’s warm flanks, went 
on trembling for a while. She told herself that she was a 
coward and a fool to be frightened by a harmless villager. 
The words he had spoken to her had probably been just a 
greeting, and her riding past in silence must have offended 
him. There was after all something in what Max had said 
about the human approach. She should have given him a 
friendly and firm “ marhaba ” and not betrayed her fear. 
That was what Ellen or Dasha would have done in her place. 
But then Ellen and Dasha had never known — anyway, she 
was all right now and quite cheerful again. Only her legs in 
the stirrups went on trembling ; for her flesh knew better, 
and knew that what the man had said had not been just a 
greeting. 

The caves in the moonlight were rather a disappointment. 
There was no tree or pole to which she could fasten Salome, 
so she had to drag the horse after her up and down the slope 



DAYS OF WRATH 


251 

while she searched for the entrance, which at night was not 
easy to find. Twice she thought she had found it, but each 
time it was only one of the empty smaller caves. The moon 
was already fairly low and it must have been pretty late in 
the night, but the sky had cleared, so its light shone brighter. 

At last she found the little mound and behind it the steep 
narrow hole leading to the vestibule. She pulled Salome’s 
head down so that she could weight the end of the reins with 
a stone, then, lying flat on her stomach, put her feet into the 
hole and let herself slide down. Down in the vestibule the 
smell was terrible — some Arab shepherds must have used 
the hole as a latrine. She groped nervously in the pockets 
of her shorts for the matches she had brought with her from 
the stable, broke one, lit the second, and found the candle- 
stump which was always left lying about in the first burial- 
chamber. In the yellow light of the candle the cave looked 
friendlier, but her apprehensions had been correct : the sand 
on the ground of the passage was littered with dried excre- 
ment. Covering her nose and mouth with her free hand and 
stooping under the low ceiling, she descended the three stone 
steps to the lower vestibule. There were the three niches, 
and the middle one was Joshua the Ancestor’s. 

The bones were still there all right and the skull was still 
missing ; no miracle had happened since her last visit. The 
bones lay in a disorderly heap on the damp sand of the 
narrow chamber. “ Hallo, Ancestor,” Dina whispered, 
squatting on her heels. She scratched a little with her nails 
in the sand, in the exciting hope of finding a coin. But the 
chamber had been plundered God knew how many times 
and by whom : Roman Legionaries, Arab shepherds. 
Crusaders, Turks, until they had even pinched the Ancestor’s 
head and strewn his bones about so that his left tibia lay 
upside-down across his ribs, like a ballet dancer’s leg thrown 
up in a high kick. She wanted to replace the tibia in its 
proper position but couldn’t get herself to touch it ; and 
while she hesitated, her bust squeezed into the chamber, a 
trickle of liquid tallow dropped from the candle into the 
sand just beneath Joshua’s pelvis and glinted there : she 



252 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

flinched, and as she hurriedly withdrew her body from the 
niche, knocked her head against the low rock ceiling. 

Biting her nails and feeling sick, she scrambled out of 
the passage. She put the candle back into the first chamber 
of the upper vestibule and crawled out through the hole, 
lifting herself up by her elbows. Salome was patiently wait- 
ing for her outside the entrance, her head bent under the 
pull of the reins ; but instead of the fresh night air for which 
she thirsted, there was once more only the hot, foul breath 
of the khamsin. 

With trembling lips she mounted the horse and began her 
descent down the steep path. The moon was almost gone 
and the hills were no longer silver-smooth and aloof, but 
dark, hulking silhouettes. She dreaded riding once more 
through the wadi but there was no other way home. She 
wished Joseph or Reuben were here with her but they slept 
far away in their beds unaware of her doings. She said a 
prayer, forgetting even to be ashamed. At some distance in 
front of her rose two dark round hillocks, almost symmetrical, 
side by side ; “ the Giant's Buttocks ” Moshe had once 
called them. She had thought it funny then, but now she 
saw the naked giant lying flat on his stomach, his hind-part 
lifted in monstrous blasphemy to the sky. 

She had reached the wadi. This was the smooth end of 
it ; she dug her heels into the tired horse's flanks until it 
broke into a jerky gallop. But they soon came to the narrow, 
twisted stretch choked with rubble where the horse could 
only advance step by step ; and as they turned the corner she 
saw the Arab with the gaping teeth standing in the middle 
of the gorge ; but this time there were two others behind 
him, waiting for her. 



DAYS OF WRATH 


253 


11 

Having finished with this week’s business in Haifa, Joseph 
early next morning took the autobus to Tel Aviv. He slept 
for most of the three hours’ journey through the orange and 
lemon groves of the Maritime Plain of Samaria of which the 
strip along the coast was in Hebrew, the next, parallel inland 
belt in Arab possession. Whenever Joseph, waking, looked 
through the window, he saw not the landscape but an unpro- 
tected flank. When they arrived in Tel Aviv, the khamsin 
had just reached its peak. 

Each time Joseph came to Tel Aviv he was torn between 
his contrasting emotions of tenderness and revulsion. 
Tenderness for the one and only purely Hebrew town in 
the world with the lyrical name of Hill of Spring and the 
jostling vitality of its hundred and fifty thousand citizens ; 
revulsion from the dreadful mess they had made of it. It 
was a frantic, touching, maddening city which gripped the 
traveller by his buttonhole as soon as he entered it, tugged 
and dragged him round like a whirlpool, and left him after 
a few days faint and limp, not knowing whether he should 
love or hate it, laugh or scorn. 

The whole adventure had started less than a generation 
ago, when the handful of native Jewish families in Arab 
Jaffa decided to build a residential suburb of their own, on 
what they imagined to be modern European lines. Accord- 
ingly they left the molehill of the Arab port with its labyrin- 
thine bazaars, exotic smells and furtive daggers, and started 
building on the yellow sand of the Mediterranean dunes the 
city of their dreams : an exact imitation of the ghetto 
suburbs of Warsaw, Cracow and Lodz. There was a main 
street named after Dr. Herzl with two rows of exquisitely 
ugly houses each of which gave the impression of an orphan- 
age or Police barracks, covered for beauty with pink, green 
and lemon-coloured stucco which after the first rains looked 
as if the house had contracted smallpox or measles. There 



254 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

was also a multitude of dingy shops, most of which sold 
lemonade, buttons and flypaper. 

In the early nineteen-twenties, with the beginnings of 
Zionist colonisation, the town had begun to spread with 
increasing speed along the beach. It grew in hectic jumps 
according to each new wave of immigration — an inland 
tide of asphalt and concrete advancing over the dunes. 
There was no time for planning and no willingness ; 
growth was feverish and anarchic like that of tropical 
weeds. Each newcomer who had brought his savings 
started to build the house of his dreams ; and woe to 
the municipal authority who tried to interfere. Was this 
the Promised Land or not ? For a decade or so, while the 
Eastern European element predominated among the immi- 
grants, the source of inspiration of all these petrified day- 
dreams remained the stone warren of the Polish small 
town. The Hill of Spring became a maze of stucco, with 
rusty iron railings along narrow-chested balconies and an 
Ionic plaster-column or Roman portico for embellishment. 

However, life in Tel Aviv in those early days owed its 
peculiar character not to the people who had houses built, 
but to the workers who built them. The first Hebrew city 
was a pioneer city dominated by young workers of both sexes 
in their teens and twenties. The streets belonged to them ; 
khaki shirts, shorts and dark sun-glasses were the fashionable 
wear, and ties, nicknamed “ herrings ”, a rarity. In the 
evening, when the cool breeze from the sea relieved the 
white glare of the day, they walked arm in arm over the hot 
asphalt of the new avenues through whose chinks the yellow 
sand oozed up and which ended abruptly in the dunes. At 
night, they built bonfires and danced the horra on the beach, 
and at least once a week they dragged pompous Mayor 
Dizengoff or old Chief Rabbi Hertz out of their beds and 
took them down to the sea to dance with them. They were 
hard-working, sentimental and gay. They were carried by 
a wave of enthusiasm which had a crest and no trough. They 
were touchy only on one point, the Hebrew language. They 
fought a violent and victorious battle against the use in 



DAYS OF WRATH 


255 

public of any other tongue ; the slogan “ Hebrews talk 
Hebrew ” was everywhere — on buses, shops, restaurants, 
hoarding-posts ; speakers from abroad who tried to address 
a meeting in Polish, German or Yiddish were howled down 
or beaten up. There were few cafes in those days but many 
workers’ clubs ; the cheap cafes sold meals on credit and 
got their supplies on credit ; landlords let rooms on credit 
in their houses which were built on credit ; and yet the 
town, instead of collapsing into the sand on which it was 
built, waxed and grew. . . . 

— Ah, those were the good old times, the legendary days 
of ten years ago ! As Joseph walked through the noisy 
crowd in Eliezer Ben Yehuda Street, of the two emotions 
battling in his chest revulsion got the upper hand. This 
cheap and lurid Levantine fair had ceased to be the pioneer 
town he had known and loved. One noisy cafe followed the 
other with flashy decorations, dance-parquets and micro- 
phones and blaring loud-speakers through which crooners 
from the suburbs of Bucharest and aged artistes from 
Salonica poured out their Hebrew imitations of American 
imitations of Cuban serenades. There were beauty parlours 
and antique shops and interior-decoration shops ; and in 
the harsh white blaze of the sun it all looked like a noontide 
spook — the oppressive dream of a sybarite who has over- 
eaten at lunch. This was the newest quarter of the town, 
built since the recent immigration from Germany and 
Central Europe had started, and the stucco-idyll of the older 
parts had been defeated by the aggressive cubism of the 
functional style. The houses here looked like rows of 
battleships in concrete ; they had flat oval terraces with para- 
pets jutting out like conning towers, and they all seemed to 
shoot at each other. The streets had no skyline and no 
perspective ; the eye jumped restlessly along the jagged, 
disconnected contours without ever coming to rest. 

Last week Joseph had run into Matthews, and Matthews 
had asked him for luncheon to-day at the Cafe Champignon 
on the beach. As Joseph crossed the over-crowded terrace 
in the noise of the orchestra playing the “ Merry Widow ”, 



256 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

people turned their heads to look at him ; he was the only 
person here in the traditional Commune dress. He felt a 
sudden homesickness for Ezra’s Tower ; it seemed to him 
that he had left it not two days, but weeks ago. 

Seated at a table near the railing, overlooking the sea, 
he saw Matthews, who was arguing with a waiter. Joseph 
felt a sudden relief at the sight of the heavy-jawed face with 
the squashed boxer’s nose — it was so obviously gentile in 
these sharp-featured Semitic surroundings. 

44 Listen,” Matthews was explaining to the waiter as 
Joseph sat down, 44 I ordered a bottle of Chablis. This 
is syrup.” 

The waiter, dressed in a white jacket whose sleeves were 
too short for him, lifted his shoulders. “ But please — it is 
written on the bottle : Chablis.” 

44 It is muck,” said Matthews. 44 Taste it.” 

44 But please : here it is written on the bottle. Perhaps it 
should be sweet — I don’t know. I have been a teacher 
before in Kowno, Lithuania.” 

44 Taste it,” said Matthews. 

“ But I don’t drink — ulcers, sir, please.” 

44 Then take this away and get me some beer.” 

44 We have no beer, please, only wine.” 

“ Then call the manager.” 

44 But the manager is busy.” 

“ Listen,” said Matthews. 44 How would you like it if I 
bashed this bottle on your head ? ” 

The waiter looked at him doubtfully, lifted his shoulders, 
and carried the bottle away. A minute later he returned with 
two jugs of iced beer, smiling all over his crumpled face. 

“ Well, how do you like Tel Aviv ? ” asked Joseph. 

Matthews took a deep draught and put his glass down, 
sighing with contentment. 44 Swell,” he said. 44 If you were 
allowed to punch somebody’s nose once a day, it would be 
the swellest city with the swellest people in the world.” 

44 Particularly the waiters,” said Joseph. 

44 Maybe the poor guy was really a teacher in Kowno, 
Lithuania, and got his ulcers in a concentration camp.” 



DAYS OF WRATH 


257 

Joseph looked round the terrace and sighed. The kham- 
sin lay on people’s faces like a spasm. The women were 
plump, heavy-chested, badly and expensively dressed. The 
men sat with sloping shoulders and hollow chests, thinking 
of their ulcers. Each couple looked as if they were carrying 
on a quarrel under cover of the 4 4 Merry Widow ”. 

44 I can’t blame the gentiles if they dislike us,” he said. 

44 That proves you are a patriot,” said Matthews. 44 Since 
the days of your prophets, self-hatred has been the Jewish 
form of patriotism.” 

Joseph wiped his face. The khamsin was telling on him. 
He felt sick of it all : Judaism, Hebraism, the whole cramped 
effort to make something revive which had been dead for 
two thousand years. 

44 It is all very well for you to talk as a benevolent out- 
sider,” he said. 44 The fact is, we are a sick race. Tradition, 
form, style, have all gone overboard. We are a people with a 
history but no background. . . . Look around you, and you’ll 
see the heritage of the ghetto. It is there in the wheedling 
lilt of the women’s voices, and in the way the men hold 
themselves, with that frozen shrug about their shoulders.” 

44 I guess that shrug was their only defence. Otherwise 
the whole race would have gone crackers.” 

44 I know. That’s what I keep repeating to myself. But 
sometimes one gets fed-up and wants to run away to a 
country with a moderate climate and moderate people, who 
don’t live in absolutes. Here even the sky conforms to the 
all-or-nothing law : nine months of scorching sun without 
a drop of rain, and three months of deluge. . . .” 

He leant back and drank some beer. 44 This is nice,” he 
said. 44 Reminds me of a certain country pub back home. 
It was dim and smoky and the men said one word each in 
half an hour.” 

44 It’s always the same story,” said Matthews. 44 If you 
are a dumb ox you want to be a chatty parrot. If you are a 
parrot, you wish you were a dignified ox. Drink your beer 
and take it easy with your Dostoevski.” 

Joseph drained his glass, smiling, 44 Of course,” he said, 



258 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ the crowd at a dog race at home isn’t a much prettier sight 
than this one. But the flaws in other races are diluted, while 
with us you get them in concentration. It’s the long in- 
breeding, I suppose. They called us the salt of the earth 
— but if you heap all the salt on one plate it doesn’t make 
a palatable dish. Sometimes I think that the Dead Sea is 
the perfect symbol for us. It is the only big inland lake 
under sea level, stagnant, with no outlet, much denser than 
normal water with its concentrated minerals and biting 
alkaloids ; over-salted, over-spiced, saturated. ...” 

“ They extract a lot of useful chemicals from it,” said 
Matthews. 

“ Oh — quite. Marx and Freud and Einstein and so on. 
They are the crystallised products of the brine. But for all 
that the water doesn’t get more palatable. . . .” 

“ How about some grub ? ” said Matthews. “ Waiter ! 
The guy won’t listen. I guess this one was an opera con- 
ductor in Danzig.” 

“ The trouble with this town is,” Joseph went on, “ that 
ten years ago the immigrants were mainly volunteers with 
an ideal in their head, and now they are mainly expatriates 
with a kick in their pants. Oh, you should have seen it ten 
years ago ! Now it has become a town of refugees — the 
saltiest stratum of the Dead Sea.” 

Matthews had at last succeeded in getting hold of the waiter 
and gave his orders. He seemed bored with the discussion. 

“ Stop worrying about your Dead Sea,” he said. “ These 
shipwrecked folk don’t matter. What matters is your new 
native generation and they’re O.K.” 

“ Yes — but they are on the other extreme. No salt 
at all. No intellectual passion, no sensitivity.” 

“ Christ — you can’t have it both ways. Maybe for fifty 
years you’ll have to stop producing Einsteins and give other 
people a chance.” 

“ You know,” Joseph said, smiling, “ you are the best 
Hebrew propagandist I’ve seen. The gentiles always are. 
Ours are all like Glickstein.” 

“ Yeah,” said Matthews. “ An Arab gent accused me 



DAYS OF WRATH 


259 

the other day of being paid by him. The fact is I’ve seen 
your Maccabi team beat the English Police three to one at 
soccer, and when they had to carry off the referee on a 
stretcher I became a Zionist. Here, let’s buy a paper.” 

A newsboy had entered the terrace, shouting out the early 
afternoon editions. Matthews bought all of them and pushed 
them across the table to Joseph. 

“ They’re all printed the wrong way round,” he said. 
“ Tell us the news about Mr. Hitler’s latest doings.” 

Joseph unfolded Davar , the Labour daily, and after a 
glance at the headlines automatically turned to the back-page 
column with the local news from the Settlements in small 
print. His face suddenly turned ashen. 

“ What’s the matter ? ” said Matthews. “ Has Chamber- 
lain done a Munich on the French ? ” 

“ No,” said Joseph. “ They have only killed Dina.” 


12 

“ There is only one chair, so you must sit on the bed,” 
said Simeon. 

His room, in the old Florentine quarter of Tel Aviv, 
looked more like a prison cell. It contained a narrow camp- 
bed, a table with a Primus cooker on it and one rickety chair. 
Instead of a wardrobe or chest there was a cardboard box 
under the bed which contained all Simeon’s belongings. 
Nevertheless the room looked clean and tidy. 

He took the Primus cooker from the table and put it 
carefully in a corner of the floor where a dark rim on the 
stone tiles indicated its usual place. 

“ As I can only go out when it is dark,” he explained, 
“ I have to cook for myself. The flat belongs to an old man 
who keeps a second-hand bookstall and is out all day.” 

Joseph sat down on the creaking bed which sagged under 
him until he almost sat on the floor. Simeon sat upright in 
the chair, facing him. 



260 thieves in the night 

“ You’d better tell me all the details,” he said. 

“ There isn’t much to tell,” said Joseph. “ The doctor 
says there were at least two at her. She must have put up 
a strong fight, for her finger-nails were broken and there was 
blood and bits of skin under them, and there was also blood 
and bits of skin between her teeth. They counted twenty- 
seven stabs on her, none of which could have caused instan- 
taneous death. Her nose was broken and some of her hair 
torn out with shreds of scalp. That is all. They also stole 
Salome.” 

He spoke in a flat voice as if giving an account to the 
weekly meeting in Ezra’s Tower. 

“ And the Police ? ” asked Simeon. 

“ The Police came next morning. They brought blood- 
hounds. The Major did all he could. There were two 
separate scents which both met at the quarry behind Kfar 
Tabiyeh. Underneath the quarry there is a pool and there 
they lost the scent. Then one dog led on to the Mukhtar’s 
house. They questioned the Mukhtar and some of the 
villagers, who all knew nothing.” 

“ And so that’s that ? ” said Simeon. 

“ As far as the Police is concerned, more or less. There 
is hardly a villager who hasn’t been to the Mukhtar’s house 
at one time or another.” 

They were silent for a little while. Joseph lit a cigarette 
and offered one to Simeon. By the way Simeon inhaled 
the smoke Joseph could see that he had not been able to 
afford cigarettes for some time. 

“ What about Reuben and the others ? ” Simeon asked. 

“ When we got back from the funeral I argued with 
Reuben and Moshe half through the night. I reminded 
them that this was the fifth case and that the Police never 
found anything and never will find anything. They said 
they were prepared to retaliate if they could find out who 
did it, but refused to take life for life indiscriminately. ...” 
He paused. “ I hope you don’t want me to repeat the argu- 
ment,” he added. 

“ No,” said Simeon. “ I know it by heart : self-restraint, 



DAYS OF WRATH 261 

ethics and the purity of the cause — the whole menu, . . . 
What came of it in the end ? ” 

44 I told them that I was through with arguing and was 
going to quit. They were quite decent about it and gave me 
a month’s leave to think it over.” 

He was crouching on the bed, yellow and shrivelled like 
a sick monkey. 

4 4 So that is how matters stand now with you,” said Simeon 
reflectively. After a while he asked : 

44 Supposing you decide to leave, what about Ellen ? ” 

44 She will get over it. And to the child it won’t make 
any difference. . . 

He made a pause then suddenly jumped up. 

44 The only question for me is,” he said vehemently, 
44 whether your crowd is willing and able to settle this, or not. 
Everything else doesn’t matter.” 

Simeon gave him a cool look and said carefully : 

44 I have to report the matter to Bauman and he has to 
take it up with the Command.” 

44 I want to speak to Bauman myself,” said Joseph. 

44 That can probably be arranged. But it will take some 
time.” 

Joseph sat down again, as if the effort had exhausted him. 
He leant back against the wall and looked vacantly at the 
ceiling through his yellow sick-monkey eyes. There was a 
faint but insistent whistling from the street. 

44 Somebody to see me,” said Simeon. 44 You must go 
now. Come and see me the day after to-morrow at the same 
time. I may have news for you by then.” 

Joseph obediently rose and walked to the door. As he 
opened it, he felt Simeon’s grip on his arm. 

44 Pull yourself together,” said Simeon. 44 In paren- 
thesis, I was also once in love with Dina. But that isn’t the 
point. The point is that these things are happening to our 
kin in Europe hour by hour.” 

44 I don’t care,” said Joseph. 

44 Then go and drown yourself,” said Simeon, giving him a 
hard push out onto the landing and banging the door after him. 



262 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Joseph reeled against the banister, stood limply for a few 
seconds, then wiped his eyes and began slowly to descend 
the narrow stairs. 


13 

A week after Dina’s last excursion to the Ancestor’s Cave, 
around midnight a heavy car jolted up the dirt track to the 
sleeping village of Kfar Tabiyeh. It halted at the Hamdan 
Mukhtar’s house and two men in Beduin dress got out of it 
and walked up the outside flight of stairs leading to the 
balcony. It was new moon and from the balcony they saw 
the searchlight of Ezra’s Tower slowly milling round the 
dark hills. The door from the balcony to the Mukhtar’s 
room stood open ; across the doorstep a servant lay on a 
mat, asleep. They shook him gently by the shoulder and 
the servant sat up with a jerk. 

“ Marhaba ,” one of the men said in a throaty dialect. 
“ We have been sent to talk to the Mukhtar.” 

“ Welcome twice. Who sent you ? ” the servant asked, 
startled. 

“ One whose name should only be mentioned in a 
whisper. ...” The two men pushed their way into the 
room, followed by the dazed servant. From a corner of the 
room they heard the Mukhtar’s snore, then the snoring sud- 
denly ceased. “ Who is there ? ” he asked in a wakeful, 
imperious voice. 

The servant lit the oil-lamp on the floor, under Mr. 
Chamberlain’s portrait with the blue beads against the Evil 
Eye. The two men touched with their finger-tips forehead 
and heart. “ Marhaba ,” said the one with the throaty voice. 
He was small, dark and wiry, with a sparse beard along the 
edge of his jaws and a tuft on the point of the chin. “ We 
have been sent to fetch you, ya Mukhtar. We have come in 
a motor-car.” 

“ Who sent you ? ” asked the Mukhtar. He was sitting 



DAYS OF WRATH 


263 

up on his bed in his blue-and-yellow striped pyjamas. The 
centre button over his stomach was open, disclosing a fluff 
of black hair. The dark little man looked meaningly in the 
direction of the servant. 4 4 Go,” said the Mukhtar, whose 
face had grown dark. The servant withdrew. 

44 Fawzi el Din is back in the hills, ya Mukhtar. He sent 
us for you. Get dressed, ya Mukhtar.’’ 

The Mukhtar looked from one to the other with a flicker 
in his eyes. 

44 They said Fawzi had surrendered to the English.” 

44 They say many things. Get ready, ya Mukhtar, we 
have little time.” 

The Mukhtar looked at them without budging. 44 Where 
is he ? ” he asked. 

44 You shall know when you get there. Fawzi likes not 
to be kept waiting.” 

44 I shall send Issa to him, as before.” 

44 He sent us for you, not for Issa. Get dressed, ya 
Mukhtar.” 

The Mukhtar looked at him, then at the other man. 
They both stared at him hard, and the flicker in the Mukh- 
tar’s eye became more pronounced. 44 Ya Mahmud ! ” he 
called. The servant appeared. 44 Get my clothes.” 

While the Mukhtar dressed, the two men waited outside 
on the balcony with their backs to the open door of the room. 
They did not speak to each other. In the distance, the thin 
beam of light from Ezra’s Tower slowly circled the night. 

The Mukhtar emerged from the room, fully dressed, 
followed by the servant. His white head-cloth floated 
majestically to his shoulders, held by the coil of spun silver 
threads. He was a head taller than the little bearded man. 
The other man was of medium height, dumpy, and of lighter 
colour. 

44 I wish to take Issa with me,” said the Mukhtar. 

44 We have been told to bring you alone,” said the little 
man. 

On the top of the stairs the Mukhtar hesitated for an 
imperceptible moment. The two men stood behind him. 



264 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ I shall be back in the morning,” said the Mukhtar over 
his shoulder to the servant. 44 There is no need to talk.” 

The servant bowed at the Mukhtar ’s back. “ Peace with 
you, ya Mukhtar.” 

They got into the car ; the Mukhtar and the man with the 
beard sat in the back, the other man took the wheel. They 
drove in silence down the bumpy dirt track. As they 
approached the bottom of the hill, the Mukhtar asked : 

44 From what country do you hail ? ” 

He could not make out the dialect the little man spoke. 
His Arabic was throaty and pure, but foreign. At first he 
had thought he recognised the accents of some of the poorer 
tribes of Sinai, but it wasn't quite that. 

44 From Hadramauth.” 

So he was a Yemenite. That’s why he had not recognised 
the dialect, the Mukhtar thought. He had never met a 
Yemenite before — except a Yemenite Jew from whom he 
had once bought a silver arm-ring in the shuks of Jerusalem. 
He remembered that he had been surprised at the pure 
Arabic that dark, wiry little Jew had spoken to him. . . . 
A sudden deadly suspicion flashed through the Mukhtar’s 
mind. He bent forward to the driver, who had so far not 
spoken a word. 4 4 And you ? ” he asked. 

44 From Beyrout, ya Mukhtar.” 

Of course, he was a typical Syrian mongrel. They had 
all shapes and shades there — God alone knew the ancestry 
of a Syrian from Beyrout. But the Sephardi Jews in Beyrout 
were mongrels too, and many of them went to Arab 
schools. . . . 

Bbah — donkey thoughts, the Mukhtar reassured him- 
self. Was he a son of death, to think of such absurdities ? 
It was only because the sudden return of Fawzi had shaken 
him. He had hoped to be rid for good of the Patriots. And 
then there was that matter with that bastard, Issa. He would 
after all have to send him away, to Beyrout, to be on the safe 
side. Issa had not told him, but the Mukhtar had seen the 
scratches on his face and the deep gash on his hand, as 



DAYS OF WRATH 


265 

though from a dog-bite. He had fallen from the horse, 
Issa had said, but the Mukhtar knew ; and he also knew 
about the others, Auni and Aref, However, she had been 
asking for it, the shameless bitch, riding a horse alone at 
night with naked arms and legs. . . . 

The car had reached the entrance to the wadi at its smooth 
end. Somewhere just round here must be the place where it 
had happened. Once more that shrill suspicion flared up 
in his brain, more insistent this time. The car stopped near 
a heap of boulders in the dry stream-bed. 

“ From here on we must walk, ya Mukhtar/’ said the 
Yemenite. 

“ Where to ? ” asked the Mukhtar, without budging from 
his seat. 

“ You will see, ya Mukhtar.” 

The driver switched the headlights off. He got out and 
stood at the door on the Mukhtar ’s side of the car. The 
Mukhtar looked from one to the other, but he could not 
make out in the darkness the look in their eyes. Puffing and 
mock-clumsily to indicate that he felt perfectly at ease, the 
Mukhtar climbed out of the car. 

“ Walk straight ahead, ya Mukhtar,” said the Yemenite. 
The Mukhtar got slowly going, and the two men followed 
behind. His white head-cloth shone in the night three steps 
ahead of them, and by the curve of his shoulders they could 
tell that his right hand was clasped on the knife in his belt. 
They turned round a sharp bend in the wadi ; at some dis- 
tance to the left they saw the soft curved silhouette of two 
twin hills, the “ Giant’s Buttocks 

“ Stop,” said the Yemenite. “ Stand still and drop that 
knife, ya Mukhtar. We have arrived.” 

The Mukhtar swerved round with an alacrity they had 
not expected from his heavy bulk. The two automatics were 
pointed from a distance of three yards straight at his stomach. 
He hesitated, then let the knife drop ; it fell with a sharp clink 
on a stone. “ How much money do you want ? ” he asked 
in a thick voice, 

“ Stand against that rock,” said the Yemenite, and the 

s 



266 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Mukhtar retreated two steps until he stood with his back 
against the rock. “ Who killed the Hebrew girl ? ” asked 
the Yemenite. 

Ah, so they did not know, the fools. Of course — had 
they known they would have taken Issa and the two others, 
instead of him. 

“ What Hebrew girl ? ” he asked ; his voice sounded 
genuinely surprised. 

“ Don’t play the fool, ya Mukhtar. Either you tell us 
who they were, or you will die in their place.” 

“ I heard there was an accident with a Hebrew girl, but 
I know no more.” 

The man from Beyrout suddenly jumped forward and 
hit him with the butt of his automatic across the face. The 
Mukhtar did not budge. He slowly passed his hand across 
his nose and mouth, looked at the blood on it and let it 
slowly drop ; then he spat out the broken teeth. 

“ Who killed her ? ” asked the Yemenite. 

“ Whom ? ” said the Mukhtar. 

The Syrian hit him again with the revolver butt, twice 
and with full force on the face and skull. The Mukhtar 
supported himself with the palms of his hands against the 
rock, then slowly slid down onto his knees. He remained 
thus for a few seconds, breathing heavily, then sat down on 
the rubble, his back against the rock. 

“ The English will hang you,” he said with an effort. 

“ If you don’t tell us who killed the Hebrew girl, you will 
die, ya Mukhtar,” said the Yemenite. 

The Mukhtar panted. “ I don’t know,” he said. “ What 
is she to you ? You are not from her village.” 

“ She was from our tribe, ya Mukhtar. Therefore we 
must kill one of your tribe to wash out the shame.” 

Through the mist and haze which surrounded his brain, 
the Mukhtar dimly realised that the Yemenite was talking 
sense. “ We will pay blood-money,” he panted. The upper 
half of his body swayed and had a tendency to slump down, 
but he supported himself in an erect position by the flat 
palms of his hands on the rubble. The world around him 



DAYS OF WRATH 


267 

grew confused, he was back in the days of his youth, haggling 
with Beduins over a blood feud. “We will pay you forty 
camels,” he panted. He began to recite like a litany the 
traditional list of camels to be paid : 

“ Raba w’rabaiah> male and female, four years old. Hag 
w’hagga , male and female, under four years. Jeda w'jeda , 
two smaller ones. Marbout w'marbouta, male and female, 
even smaller. Libne w’libnieh , two yearlings. Majroud 
w’mafrouda , two small ones being weaned from their 
mother. . . .” 

“ Who killed the Hebrew girl ? ” asked the Yemenite. 

“ She was a whore/’ the Mukhtar panted. “ Who can 
blame them ? You are strangers — bringers of whores and 
corruption — strangers. . . 

His heavy body suddenly slumped over. The Yemenite 
picked up the Mukhtar’s knife from the stones. 

“ Wake up, ya Mukhtar, for you are going to die now,” 
he said. 

The Mukhtar raised himself and, panting, tried to crawl 
away on all-fours. For a minute or so the Yemenite watched 
him crawl blindly round in circles among the scree ; then 
he stabbed him between the shoulders. The Mukhtar 
groaned and tried to crawl quicker, while the Yemenite went 
on stabbing him, until he collapsed on his stomach. 

They found him the next day on exactly the same spot 
where Dina had been found, with twenty-seven stabs in his 
body, and a typewritten note in Arabic pinned to it : 
“ Akhaza assar zo’nafa ellar — revenge has been taken and 
the shame done away with ”, It was the ancient Beduin 
phrase which the tribe chants in triumph when a blood-guilt 
has been avenged. 

Investigation by the police established that the murderers 
had come in a motor-car from a different part of the country, 
that there was no evidence of their having any connection 
with the settlers of Ezra’s Tower, and that they were persons 
originating from Arab countries, one of them a Yemenite. 
The Police further assumed that the killers belonged to 



268 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Bauman’s notorious “ Plugath ha-shakkorim ” or Black 
Squad, recruited from among the coloured Jews from Iraq, 
Kurdistan, Yemen and Bokhara ; but they were unable to 
produce any decisive clues. 

After the Mukhtar’s funeral a crowd of villagers from 
Kfar Tabiyeh marched up the slope of the Dogs’ Hill and 
threw stones at Ezra’s Tower, but they were dispersed with- 
out serious incident by the reinforced Settlement Police. 
For a few days there was considerable excitement in the 
village, and rumours circulated to the effect that Fawzi’s 
gang would return and burn down the whole of the Hebrew 
Settlement. These rumours were discussed with mixed 
feelings, as the Patriots had drawn heavily on the village’s 
cattle and sheep ; besides, the harvest of the winter crop 
was at hand, and if trouble broke out again most of the harvest 
would be lost. 

The basic reason, however, of the villagers’ half-hearted 
reaction to their Mukhtar’s death was that they regarded the 
matter as a private blood feud between the Hamdan clan 
and the Settlers. They called the Hebrew girls whores and 
bitches, but they had disapproved of the hideous deed of 
Issa and his accomplices. Issa was anyway disliked through- 
out the village, and the two others were known as thoroughly 
bad lots, both of them having been previously jailed for theft. 
After the murder of the Hebrew girl the villagers had ex- 
pected to find one at least of the three with his throat cut any 
morning, and would have regarded this more or less as a 
matter of course, a logical development of the blood feud. 
That the Hebrews had picked on the Mukhtar instead of 
Issa was an unexpected and sensational turn of events, but 
nevertheless strictly in conformity with blood law, according 
to which the injured party is entitled to take its revenge on 
the first near relative of the murderer they can lay their hands 
on. The fact that they had chosen the most important 
member of the Hamdan clan even rather impressed the 
villagers. The issue now clearly rested between Issa and the 
people of the Dogs* Hill. It was Issa’s duty and privilege 
to avenge his father, and it would have been grave pre- 



DAYS OF WRATH 


269 

sumption on anybody else’s part to interfere in the matter. 

However, Issa appeared in no hurry to take action, except 
for the dropping of occasional hints to the effect that he was 
making elaborate plans and would soon be on the murderers’ 
track. Meanwhile he made preparations for a journey to 
Jerusalem, allegedly in connection with his planned revenge, 
in fact because there was some business to settle with the 
Arab Bank about his father’s heritage, and also because he 
wanted to have a look round the capital, to which he had 
never been before. 

With the approach of the harvest, the excitement in Kfar 
Tabiyeh began to ebb. For some weeks there was still 
tension between the two villages ; the people of Kfar 
Tabiyeh ceased to hire the tractor from Ezra’s Tower and 
to send their children to the dispensary — until the other 
Mukhtar’s first grandchild had its arm bitten through by 
an enraged mule. The child was saved, and after that rela- 
tions were gradually resumed. The deaths of Dina and the 
Mukhtar were never referred to, and for some years to come 
no further acts of aggression were committed by the people 
of Kfar Tabiyeh against the settlers of Ezra’s Tower. 


14 


Pages from the chronicle of Joseph, a member of the 
Commune of Ezra! s Tower 


Tel Aviv, Monday , May ... 1939 

The eternally surprising thing after a shock which at the 
time seemed to unhinge the world is that the earth keeps 
turning and one’s stomach digesting. It is this benevolent 
indifference of Nature pedantically sticking to her routine 
which keeps us sane. But as we are parts of Nature, her 
indifference is also at work inside ourselves. Our heart- 
beat has only stopped for a moment. Once it has resumed 
its regular ticking we have already surrendered to the uni- 



270 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

versal law of indifference, and its total assertion will only be 
a question of time. At this stage our suffering undergoes a 
change of colour ; the original pain turns into a secondary 
feeling of guilt. For to go on living is already a betrayal, a 
breach of solidarity towards the dead. 

This is the stage when the transformed pain becomes 
almost unbearable. Up to now we were dazed, floating over 
the border between the two realms. Now the day has come 
when the line between them is drawn ; and only now do we 
realise the finality of the division and the callous surrender 
of making it. By returning to life we have made a frontier 
and condemned the dead to permanent exile. 

Then comes the second change. We no longer suffer with 
the dead, but from the void she left behind her. The person 
has been replaced by her hollow mould. It is impressed upon 
all the objects that surround us, and on everything we do. 
The more we suffer from the aggression of these petrified 
traces, the guiltier we feel. Live memories become fossilised. 
We don’t pity the dead but ourselves for the loss suffered — 
those parts of us which were shared, and have been torn off. 
It is a loss of property, a depreciation in value of all our 
activities. It is an egotistic pain, as all pain is. This, if any, 
is the meaning of “ let the dead bury their dead ”, 

To surrender to life and yet to try to preserve the full 
integrity of the pain is a hypocrisy bom of guilt. Once the 
choice is made there is no going back, and the task is to adapt 
oneself to a changed and impoverished world. The constant 
mourner lives in the magic hope that it may become again 
what it was before. It never will. The world has lost some 
of its warmth which it will not recapture. A solar spot has 
burst and expanded its heat into the great pool of entropic 
indifference. Its spectrum has undergone a change which 
affects everything I experience or do. Ezra’s Tower will 
never be the same. Triumph will be less triumphant and 
defeat less stinging. Everything has become a little less 
important, a little paler, a little greyer. That is all. After 
a year this general impoverishment will be all that remains 
of Dina, who rode with me on a truck on our first night, and 



DAYS OF WRATH 


271 

always wore a blue shirt open at the neck, and whose hair 
was blown over her face when we climbed to the top of the 
Tower, by the soft wind of Galilee. . . . 


Tuesday 

The death of the Mukhtar makes everything only more 
final. It was as if Dina had been buried with an undrawn 
cheque in her fist. Now the account is settled and the file 
closed. There is nothing more to be done. Yesterday there 
still was. 

Perhaps if they had allowed me to take part in the action 
it would have been different. I wonder. I remember that 
night, after I had tried to kiss her dry lips with the clenched 
teeth, how . . . 

God, God, the things they must have done to her. . . . 
Later 

I have to go through with it. Words are the only magic 
to exorcise the pain. 

... I remember that night, after I had tried to kiss her 
dry lips with the clenched teeth — how I lay in the field, 
biting the earth and raving of revenge. It was the same 
during the whole week before I learned about the Mukhtar’s 
death. I implored Simeon to let me take part in it and I 
demanded in all earnest that they should not only kill but 
torture — screaming at him until he threw me out. And 
now it means nothing to me, except a hideous anticlimax ; — 
and the knowledge that the file is closed and nothing remains 
to be done. 

An eye for an eye would be a wise rule if the victim could 
regain his sight by the culprit's eye. I have experienced 
that the desire for revenge may become a physical yearning 
like thirst ; but its consummation is like drinking salt water. 
Some men adrift on the sea go on drinking it until they lose 
their reason. Some killers go on kicking their dead victim 
in the rage of their impotence. But the dead is always 
triumphant and the living is always defeated. 



272 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Wednesday 

If I had emotions to spare I would perhaps even pity the 
fat Mukhtar. Nevertheless I believe that this action was 
necessary and justified. Whether we like it or not, all social 
life is based on the implicit assumption of collective responsi- 
bility for individual deeds. Jesus was denounced not by one 
Caiaphas but by “ the Jews ” who carry the blame to this 
day ; the first Parliament was instituted by “ the English ” 
and every Englishman is proud of, and seems to participate 
in, this act ; the same goes for the Rights of Man which 
“ the French ” gave the world and the concentration camps 
in which “ the Germans ” murder us. In war we act on the 
principle that the blame is homogeneously distributed among 
the individuals who constitute the enemy nation and hence 
that it makes no difference which particular individual is 
killed. Civilised warfare is as promiscuous in the choice of 
its targets as an Arab blood feud — which Europeans regard 
as a barbarity ; and in three-dimensional war even discrimina- 
tion between ages and sexes disappears completely. The 
only remaining difference is that the laws of the tribal blood 
feud are more honest and explicit in treating the adversary 
as a homogeneous, collectively responsible unit. 

“ The Arabs ” have been waging intermittent tribal war 
against us for the last three years ; if we want to survive we 
have to retaliate according to their accepted rules. By 
throwing bombs into Arab markets the Bauman gang per- 
forms exactly the same inhuman military duty as the crew 
of a bomber plane ; the only difference is that the latter do 
it from the comparative safety of a few thousand feet in the 
air. To throw a hand-made bomb in a crowded bazaar 
needs at least as much courage as to press a button opening the 
bomb-trap. And yet pilots are called heroes and the Bauman 
gang are called gangsters and terrorists and what have you. 

Of course, to press a shining metal button high up in the 
air is a more hygienic business than to plant a knife into a 
fat Mukhtar. What the public resents is not the killing but 
the detail and the mess. To sign a declaration of war is an 
act of statesmanship ; to bump off the man before he can 



DAYS OF WRATH 273 

sign is a crime. Our ethics are but an elaborate form of 
schizophrenia. 

But all this has nothing to do with Dina. I do not wish 
to avenge her any longer. If I decide to quit and join 
Bauman, it will not be for this reason. Dina, you are out 
of this. “ Into thy hands I commend my spirit.” Ah, if it 
were as simple as that. Into thy hands with the broken nails 
and bits of torn skin under them. . . . My spirit, yes — but 
my reason I deny you. And if my heart is burnt to ashes, 
my reason I shall keep on ice. 

Sabbath 

More than half of my month’s leave has gone. If I look 
back at this last fortnight, the days and nights seem to melt 
into one dim, shapeless smudge. It has the ambiguity of 
being both a very short and very long time — like a single 
flash fixed on a film where one can only afterwards measure 
its length. Most of the time I spent in my room working on 
Pepys or brooding and day-dreaming. I don’t know what I 
would have done had Moshe not given me the money to take 
a room by myself. I have spoken to nobody except Simeon. 
Once I went swimming in the sea ; but I remembered the 
last time I had gone swimming with Dina, so I went home 
and it was worse than ever. I feel constantly hungry but am 
unable to eat the things which she liked. At first I re-lived 
all our memories ; now I try to avoid everything that reminds 
me of her. I move about like an invalid with a bandaged 
wound anxious to avoid rubbing against the furniture and 
walls. It is a kind of tight-rope walk where one always falls 
off the rope. 

I know that I have a decision to take, but if I try to think 
it out I get nowhere. Instead of arriving at a result, I find 
myself lost in a day-dream. I try to straighten out the coils 
of my brain but they keep slipping from my grasp and curling 
up again. Perhaps real decisions are never thought out; 
they mature by themselves as a tree grows. So I have post- 
poned the whole issue until after I have spoken to Bauman. 



274 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Simeon says it will be some time next week. They have to 
be careful, as a whole bunch of them were arrested a few 
days ago. 

The trouble is, I don’t seem to care either way. I haven’t 
been home since the funeral, and I rather dread seeing the 
Place again. It appears to me empty, changed and hostile. 
The Tower is like a threatening memento. A new disease : 
turrophobia. 

But the alternative holds no lure either. To bump off 
somebody and get caught and hanged would probably be 
all right. But one doesn’t get oneself hanged as easily as that. 
Nothing is easy in this specialised world of ours. They 
didn’t even let me take part in the killing of the Mukhtar. 
You have to start from scratch, and work your way with 
patience and perseverance until you earn your cord. Simeon 
took some pains to explain this to me. And I haven’t got the 
patience to take a course in terrorism as if it were practical 
gardening or rabbit-breeding. For one thing, it tastes too 
much of the cinema. For another, I have no patience left 
for anything. To hug a phantom in one’s arms night after 
night doesn’t leave one much vigour for the day. 

No watchmaker can mend a broken spring ; he has to 
send for a new one. Where can I look for a new spring ? 

Words, words, words. The trouble is that the whole issue 
upon which I have to decide has lost its reality for me. I no 
longer care a damn about Round Table Conferences, Arabs, 
Hebrews and National Homes. I wonder whether I ever did. 

There was of course the Incident. But what a squalid 
little incident to decide a man’s fate — even if the man was 
only an over-sensitive boy. Simeon’s, for instance, is quite 
a different case. Simeon has all the Roman virtues ; he loves 
his people and hates their enemies. I do not even love my 
people. I rather dislike them. Self-hatred is the Jew’s 
patriotism, Matthews said. 

Sunday 

Before my father died there was a time when he took me 
every Sunday to the slums. There I learned that the poor 



DAYS OF WRATH 


275 

were not the nice superior people which they appear in fairy 
stories, but wretched, illiterate and drunk ; the women were 
hags with shrill voices and the children had nits. So I 
became a socialist not because I loved, but because I hated 
the poor. They were what conditions had made them, and 
therefore conditions had to be changed. 

After the Incident I began to frequent those whom I had 
decided to regard henceforth as my people. They were as 
disappointing as the poor had been. I was attracted by their 
keenness, their intensity and their brains, but their achieve- 
ments were spoiled for me by their, ostentation. I hated 
their acid analytical faculty, their inability to relax. I hated 
their lack of form and ceremony and breeding, their short- 
cuts from courtesy to familiarity, their mixture of arrogance 
and cringing. They were the slum race of the world : their 
slums were the ghettoes, whether the walls were made of 
stone or prejudice. 

Constant segregation would thwart the healthiest race ; if 
you keep slinging mud at people they will smell. Persecution 
has not ceased for the last twenty centuries and there is no 
reason to expect that it will cease in the twenty-first. It 
will not cease until the cause is abolished, and the cause is 
in ourselves. With all the boons we have brought to 
humanity we are not liked, and I suspect the reason is that 
we are not likable. If the poor were as idealised propaganda 
paints them, it would be a crime to interfere with their happi- 
ness ; if the Jews were as the philosemites describe them, 
there would be no reason for this Return. But Jewry is a 
sick race ; its disease is homelessness, and can only be cured 
by abolishing its homelessness. 

I became a socialist because I hated the poor ; and I became 
a Hebrew because I hated the Yid. 

Monday 

On Simeon’s advice I have been re-reading the chapters 
in Flavius Josephus about Massada, the last Hebrew fortress 
which, after the fall of Jerusalem, held out against the Romans. 
When the Romans set fire to the inner wall by means of 



2j6 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

catapulted fire-brands, and Massada had become untenable, 
the Commander of the Fortress gave orders to the garrison 
to kill first all the women and children and then themselves. 
In his last speech he explained to them what fate awaited 
those who fell alive into the hands of the Romans ; then 
he went on : 

“ But I find that you are such people as are no better than 
others either in virtue or in courage , and are afraid of dyings 
though you be delivered thereby from the greatest miseries . 
For the laws of our country and of God himself have from 
ancient times continually taught us that it is life that is a 
calamity to man and not death ; for the union of what is 
divine and what is mortal is disagreeable . . . .” 

He must have been a personality of remarkable powers to 
persuade his men to cut the throats of their women and 
children and afterwards their own ; and it was a long and 
protracted business, for there were nine hundred and sixty- 
two of them ; and only two women, who had hidden them- 
selves in an underground cave, escaped to tell the tale. Each 
man slew his own family ; then they chose ten men by lot 
who slew all the other men ; then they cast lots again and 
the one to whom it fell killed the remaining nine and finally 
himself. The name of this last man, the last free Hebrew 
to live, has not been recorded, nor any other names of the 
garrison, except that of the Commander, one Eliezer Ben 
Yair ; and Yair is the alias adopted by the spiritual leader of 
the Bauman gang : Abraham Stem. 

It is a savage tale, this story of the last Hebrew fortress, 
and yet strangely soothing. “ The union of what is divine 
and what is mortal is disagreeable. . . .” There is an un- 
mistakable Christian accent, and yet neither Ben Yair nor his 
chronicler Josephus seem to have had any knowledge of the 
new sect. But it was a time of howling and gnashing of teeth, 
and the new religion with its emphasis on immortality and 
resurrection was in the air. “ Who is there,” Yair asks 
referring to the mass slaughter of Hebrews by the Romans, 
“ who is there that revolves these things in his mind and yet 
is able to bear the sight of the sun, though he himself might 



DAYS OF WRATH 


277 

live out of danger ? . . I believe there is a similar reason 
for the religious trend among our terrorists. The Hebrew 
underground began as a purely political movement and has 
developed more and more mystic accents. Simeon showed 
me yesterday some of Yair-Stern’s poetry. It has a strange 
archaic fervour — quite untranslatable : 

My teacher carried his praying-scarf in a velvet bag to the 
synagogue : 

Even so carry I my sacred gun to the Temple 

That its voice may pray for us. 

Or the refrain of the anthem he wrote for the under- 
ground movement : 

These are the days of wrath , the nights of holy despair : 

Fight your way home , eternal tramp , 

Your house we shall repair 

And mend the broken lamp. 

Though he tries to hide it, Simeon has an almost religious 
admiration for Yair-Stem. He seems to regard him as a kind 
of gunman-messiah. 

Tuesday 

At last — to-morrow I am going to see Bauman in 
Jerusalem. Apparently that is where he lives, or at least, 
where he is at present. Curious — all the time I imagined 
that he was here in Tel Aviv ; and though Simeon never 
directly said so, I was under the impression that he lived 
somewhere just around the corner. This somehow strikes 
me as a particularly neat piece of deception, though properly 
speaking there was no deception at all. Simeon never gives 
himself conspiratorial airs, and yet he is completely wrapped 
up in a shroud of elusiveness. Conspiring has become such 
a routine with him that it is invisible. I believe he hardly 
ever lies to me ; he just automatically omits every reference 
to relevant facts. The closer I come to these people’s world 
the more I feel as if I were running into a dense bank of fog 
inside which all is muffled and dim, and full of deceptive 
echoes. 



278 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

To leave this room where I have been hiding since I came 
back from the funeral is like breaking up another link with 
Dina. There has never been such intimacy between us as 
within these solitary walls. Her picture hangs over the bed ; 
I shall take it off the last minute before we leave. It was her 
room as much as mine ; the scene of our bitter honeymoon. 

To-morrow she will become homeless again and have to 
look for another exile and suffer another betrayal. The law 
of universal indifference will have stolen another victory, and 
will go on ticking in my flesh. 

There is one alone , and there is not a second . 

If two lie together then they have heat : but how can one be 
warm alone ? 


15 

The city of Jerusalem is a mosaic of religious and national 
Communities, more or less neatly divided into separate 
residential quarters competing in holiness and mutual hatred. 

Its sacred core, the Old City, is surrounded by Soleiman’s 
Wall and divided into a Moslem, a Christian, an Armenian 
and a Jewish quarter. Outside the Wall there is the German 
Colony, the Greek Colony and the Commercial Centre ; the 
rest of the town is part Arab, part Hebrew. The latter part 
is again subdivided according to the origin and period of the 
immigrants who built it, from the ancient slum ghetto of the 
quarter of the Hundred Gates to ultra-modern Rechavia, 
non- Aryan offshoot of the Weimar Republic complete with 
glass, chromium, Goethe, Adler and Thomas Mann. Each 
of these separate worlds lives at no more than a ten minutes’ 
walk from the others. They stare and sniff at each other 
without mixing, rather like camels sniff at the exhaust pipes 
of motor-cars, and derive about as much satisfaction from it. 

The night after their arrival in Jerusalem, Joseph and 
Simeon walked through the badly lit Ajrab quarter of Musrara, 
almost deserted at this late hour, then turned into Me’a 
She’arim, the Street of the Hundred Gates. The “ Hundred 



DAYS OF WRATH 


279 

Gates ” is the oldest of the Hebrew quarters outside the 
confines of the Old City ; it was founded in the eighteen- 
seventies, and its first inhabitants were the ancient and pious 
who came to the Land not to live but to die. They brought 
with them their savings of a lifetime, which they handed over 
to the Kehillah, the Jewish Community, in exchange for a 
monthly pittance to the day of their death. While waiting 
to die they prayed, quarrelled, studied the Book and made 
souvenirs of the Holy Land — albums with pressed flowers 
from Mount Scopus, sachets of velvet filled with holy earth, 
pen-holders of olivewood with a tiny inlaid lens through 
which one could see a micro-panorama of Jerusalem. These 
souvenirs were sent abroad to be sold to other Jews, and their 
proceeds were the main income of the Community. In 
between these godly occupations the elders of the Hundred 
Gates fought their family feuds, cheated, begged, got drunk 
once a year to celebrate Esther’s triumph over Haman, fasted 
on the day of the Temple’s destruction, ate bitter herbs to 
commemorate the exodus from Egypt, blew the ram-horn 
which brought down the walls of Jericho, expected Messiah’s 
arrival from week to week, and while waiting to die begot 
children at a patriarchal age. As the years passed younger 
people too began to inhabit the Hundred Gates, men in black 
kaftans and fur hats, women with shorn heads and wigs, 
pious and prolific. A dozen children to a couple were no 
rarity in those days, the younger ones sleeping in their 
parents’ beds, the others on the floor ; they lived in holiness 
and squalor, in tenements with labyrinthine courts and long 
narrow iron balconies teeming with toddlers and vermin. 
Unlike the Moslem slums which were fragrant with spices, 
horse-dung and charcoal, the Hundred Gates smelt of oil 
lamps and Primus cookers, damp washing and hot beans in 
grease. However, underneath all this variety of smells lay 
as an ever-present foundation the odour of Jerusalem : the 
odour of the sun-heated rocks and of the white chalk dust in the 
streets, product of the decaying stone on which the city stands. 

“ If you bandaged my eyes,” said Joseph, “ I could still 
tell the Hundred Gates by their holy stench.” 



280 thieves in the night 

They had walked in silence for the last few minutes and 
Joseph spoke mainly to ease his own tension. But while he 
spoke he remembered Dina’s obsession about smells, and 
instantly he knew that Simeon remembered it too. The lines 
of transmission from Ezra’s Tower, from their common past, 
were still functioning, though they trailed loosely like tele- 
graph wires damaged by a storm. He still felt the old 
affection for Simeon, but they had both changed, and so 
had the quality of their relationship. 

“ That is one way of looking at the Hundred Gates,” said 
Simeon. “ I will tell you another way. A few weeks ago 
two elderly rabbis of the Chassidic sect contacted the Com- 
mand. They were brought with the usual precautions before 
Bauman. I was present at the interview. When they were 
led into the hide-out they were literally trembling with fear. 
Bauman asked them what they wanted. The older rabbi 
asked him after some humming and hawing whether it was 
in our power to occupy on a given day the Mosque of Omar 
for two hours. Bauman asked for what purpose. The rabbi 
explained that the two of them were kabbalists, students of 
the Zohar, and that they had established beyond doubt the 
conditions under which the advent of Messiah can be brought 
about. This year was the propitious one and it was only 
necessary to perform a certain sacrifice accompanied by a 
certain ritual on the Sacred Rock where Abraham offered 
Isaac, where the First Temple stood and where the Mosque 
of Omar now stands. Seven Kohanim of the rabbi’s choice, 
direct descendants of the priestly aristocracy of Israel, were 
already undergoing the prescribed rites of purification, and 
the animals for the sacrifice had been chosen and bought. 
All they needed now was that we should occupy the Mosque 
of Omar on the given day, and hold out for two hours. 

Do you realise, rabbi, that it would cost us many dead 
and bring immediate civil war over our heads ? ’ said 
Bauman. 

“ ‘ Yes, there would perhaps be some people killed,’ said 
the rabbi, ‘ but they would only be dead for a few hours 
because Resurrection would follow immediately. And as for 



DAYS OF WRATH 281 

civil war ’ — he smiled — 4 well, well, Messiah will look 
after that.’ 

“ So Bauman told them he would look into the matter, 
and as they left, the younger man, who was one of the chosen 
Kohanim, kissed his hand, and the older one kissed him on 
the mouth. — I am glad you did not laugh at the story,” 
Simeon concluded. 

Joseph knew that a few months ago he certainly would 
have laughed. Even now he listened to the story with mixed 
feelings. He envied Simeon for whom it was easy not to 
laugh — Joseph actually could not remember ever having 
seen Simeon laugh, and his rare smile was confined to the 
lower half of his face. Once, Joseph remembered, he had 
asked Dasha, who for a time had been in love with Simeon, 
why she did not live with him. 44 One does not embrace a 
razor,” Dasha had said. 

They left the labyrinth of the Hundred Gates and turned 
into the Bokharian Quarter. It was plunged into darkness 
except for an occasional window lit by a candle or oil-lamp. 
In the thin light of the crescent moon the chalk dust of the 
decaying rock shimmered white on the unpaved road. The 
houses here were more spacious ; it was a poor quarter, but 
of austere dignity. Its inhabitants had come towards the 
end of the last century from the Emirate of Bokhara in 
Central Asia. Their ancestors had begun their Eastward 
migrations after the destruction of the Temple by Titus. 
They had first gone to Mesopotamia where Hebrew culture 
flourished for a while at the universities of Sura and Pom- 
pedita ; then, when the usual happened, they had wandered 
on to Kurdistan and Turkmenistan and Bokhara. After the 
Moslem conquest they formed small indestructible islands 
in the Islamic Sea ; cut off as they were from the rest of 
the world, the Bokharian Community gradually became 
convinced that they were the only surviving Jews on the 
earth. For about fifteen hundred years nothing happened 
to shake their conviction. They lived in segregation ; their 
shops in the bazaars had to be two feet under street level 

T 



282 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

so that their heads should not reach over the Moslem 
customers’ shoulders ; in the streets they had to wear a 
rope round their waist so that an instrument of punishment 
should be handy if they gave offence. 

In 1866 a Russian army under Suvarov entered the 
Emirate of Bokhara. Among the Russian soldiers was a 
Jew. He brought the incredible tale that there were millions 
of Jews left in the world, and was called a liar. Challenged 
to name a town in Europe where such alleged Jews lived, he 
named the Warsaw suburb Nalewki. The Jews of Bokhara 
went into council and finally produced a letter which was 
duly stamped and addressed “ to the Venerable Jews in the 
Town of Nalewki on the Continent of Europe ”. The letter 
arrived ; and in due time an answer reached the Chief Rabbi 
of Bokhara. It began with a rather cool confirmation of the 
soldier’s tale, the Jews of Nalewki obviously resenting the 
doubt cast upon their existence ; while the rest of the letter 
was devoted to a detailed analysis of the grammatical offences 
against the Holy Language contained in the letter of the 
Bokharian Jews. 

Simeon and Joseph turned into a narrow side lane. It 
was dark and steep ; the part of the lane behind them ended 
abruptly in a field of stones. They were near the outer 
confines of the city, where Jerusalem ended and the Judean 
desert began. Somewhere on that dark stony slope were 
the tombs of the Judges with seventy burial shafts hewn out 
the rock, supposedly the graves of the Sanhedrin, the 
High Court of Israel. Joseph had visited them a few weeks 
before ; the closely packed, narrow burial chambers looked 
much the same as the Ancestor’s Cave at Ezra’s Tower and 
the countless other rock-graves all over the country. The 
land was honeycombed with them ; wherever one travelled 
they looked at one like tiny black windows in the white 
surface of the rocks. And yet there were no ghosts or 
haunted houses anywhere. Perhaps the dead hereabouts 
were too old and intimate with God to indulge in such 
clumsy manifestations. 



DAYS OF WRATH 


283 

“I am sure that Dina went to see the cave that night,” 
Joseph heard himself say without knowing why, or remem- 
bering his intention of saying it. 

“ How do you know ? ” Simeon asked in a curious voice. 

Joseph gave no answer. They walked past a window lit 
by candle-light inside. Joseph saw a bare room, a little under 
street level. It was furnished with one iron bed, straw mats 
on the stamped mud floor and one large piece of Bokhara 
tapestry — red sun-disks on black silk — hung on the white- 
washed wall. On the bed sat a young woman in a coloured 
head-cloth giving her breast to a child. The man was lying 
on his stomach full length on the floor, with two candles in 
front of him, studying the Book in a thick-papered folio 
print yellow with age ; around him on the floor lay the 
various Commentaries in equally bulky editions. He was 
in shirt-sleeves, had a black beard and wore a coloured 
skull-cap on the back of his head. He read rapidly, marking 
the line with his finger and nodding his head ; from time to 
time he turned to one of the Commentaries and then back 
to the Book. The woman was slowly rocking her body 
forward and back, her gaze fixed on the candle. The lips 
of the man moved in a steady murmur and he kept on 
nodding rapidly with his head and shoulders. The two 
rhythmic movements were like two pendulums out of step. 

— They walked on and turned another comer. There 
were no lights showing anywhere, but it was not completely 
dark, as it never is in Jerusalem, the stars being numerous, 
bright and close. There was a faint odour of chalk dust, 
burnt logs and thyme — in the Bokhari Quarter, Arab and 
Hebrew smells became fused. In one of the barrel-vaulted 
doorways stood a boy and a girl in shorts, their arms round 
each other. They looked closely at Simeon, apparently 
resenting the disturbance. Simeon said something which 
sounded like a password. “ B’ seder” said the boy, “ all 
clear.” Again they turned a corner and almost stumbled 
over a Yemenite beggar asleep with his head on a doorstep. 
He woke and put his hand out, drowsily wailing his litany. 
Simeon gave the password and the Yemenite waved them 



284 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

on, flashing his white teeth over the scant black beard. 

“ Is he sleeping on his tommy-gun or what ? ” Joseph 
could not refrain from asking. 

Simeon walked on a few steps before he answered ; then 
he said : 

“ If you think this is a comedy there is still time to turn 
back.” 

“ I am sorry,” said Joseph. 

The street was as dark and quiet as before, but suddenly 
there seemed to be something uncanny about its silence. 
Joseph felt as if eyes were watching them from behind each 
of the dark windows. They arrived in front of a large stone 
building whose massive front was broken up by vaulted 
windows and gates and some thin columns, which gave it 
a vaguely oriental look. It had a flat roof, and Joseph saw 
the silhouette of a man bend over the parapet to peer down 
at them, and then withdraw. A relief inscription over the 
main gate told him that this was a House of Prayer and 
Learning, built by one Ephraim Ben Huda, a native of 
Bokhara, who had arrived in the Land with his wife, nine 
children and five brothers, in the year 5672 from the creation 
of the world ; which, Joseph worked out, was roughly fifty 
years ago. 

They passed the main gate and a second gate, and halted 
in front of a side door where Simeon rapped out a signal 
on the panelling. After a few seconds it was opened by the 
shamash or door-keeper. He was a short and very thin old 
man in a kaftan reaching down to his feet, and with a black 
skull-cap from which two long plaited side-locks emerged 
like pigtails and hung down to the edge of his jaw. He closed 
the door behind them without a word. They were in a dark 
corridor from which opened the door to the shamash ' s lodge, 
lit by a candle. On a mat on the floor lay the shamash ' s 
wife under a large, striped quilt cover. She had a round 
face framed by black plaits which gave her a youngish air, 
and a terribly fat body which shaped the quilt into a hillock. 
The shamash shuffled into his room and closed the door from 
inside, leaving them in darkness. Simeon pulled an electric 



DAYS OF WRATH 


285 

torch from his pocket and in its light Joseph saw that they 
were walking over a floor of stone mosaic in a chess-board 
pattern. They came into a hall which, judged by the echo 
of their steps, must be vast and empty. 

“ This place is called 4 The Palace said Simeon in a 
voice only slightly lower than normal. “ You will have to 
learn to find your way in the dark, as on the ground and 
upper floors we can use no light. In the cellars it is safe.” 

Later on Joseph learned the history of “ the Palace ”. 
It was a building originally meant to serve as a synagogue 
and Bible seminary, and also as a residence for the rich 
Bokhari who had built it. The synagogue and seminary had 
been on the ground floor ; upstairs there were a large, now 
derelict, banqueting-hall and a great number of bedrooms. 
The old Bokhari was still alive and said to be over a hundred. 
His wife had died, his brothers and children had gone out 
into the world ; he lived alone in a small room with a 
painted glass door opening onto a landing, which had once 
served as a pantry. There he sat all day and night smoking 
his water pipe and studying the Book, hardly ever emerging 
from it. The shamash , who was almost as old as he and 
whom he had brought with him from Bokhara, and the 
shamash ' s wife who was about half a century younger than 
her husband, were looking after him. From time to time 
his children and grandchildren came to see him, and once 
a year on the eve of Passover the whole tribe assembled in 
the banqueting-hall, cleared for this occasion of the cobwebs 
and the plaster flaking from the ceiling, to eat the meal of 
bitter herbs and unleavened bread, and listen to the recital 
of the exodus from Egypt. 

Underneath the ground floor there was a labyrinth of 
cellars, vaults and rooms. Here had once lived the servants, 
the servants’ relatives, the servants’ friends and the servants’ 
guests. It was said that since the building was finished the 
rich Bokhari had never been down to the cellars. A year 
ago one of his great-grandsons had joined Bauman’s organisa- 
tion and had asked the old man for permission to use the 
cellars at night “ for purposes of teaching and learning ”. 



286 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

He did not say what was going to be taught and learned, 
but the old man consented without asking ; he was not 
interested in the cellars, and he was not interested in any- 
thing any longer — except his water pipe, the Book, and 
playing kabbalistic patience by shuffling the letters which 
make up the Name to derive new meanings from each 
chance permutation. 

The shamash asked no questions either. Though the 
sounds of the rifle-range installed in the thick-walled cellars 
reached him only as muffled thuds, he presumably under- 
stood that the friends of his young master were preparing 
to fight the Moslems ; and he wholeheartedly approved of 
fighting the Moslems, who, when he was a boy, had cut off 
three fingers of his right hand for the theft committed by 
another boy of three apples. The shamash knew his place ; 
he never spoke a word to the members of the organisation, 
nor was ever spoken to by them. 

As to the shamash 1 s young wife, she had once asked her 
husband what those nightly goings-on meant, and had re- 
ceived such an unusually terrible beating with the rope from 
the withered little elder whom she over-towered by a head's 
length, that she never committed the sin of curiosity again. 

They crossed the vast empty hall, their steps faintly 
resounding ; the yellow circle of Simeon's torch moved over 
the floor like a puddle of light in front of them. They had 
passed a young sentry in khaki shorts and shirt at the end 
of the corridor ; a second one grew suddenly out of the 
darkness as they reached the staircase leading down to the 
cellars. The sentries saluted, clicking their heels and lifting 
the right forearm bent at the elbow, with the open palm 
facing forward. No words were exchanged. They walked 
down the steps into a passage in the cellars, lit by oil-lamps. 
Joseph was glad of the light ; the dark hall with its silent 
sentries had been rather distasteful and oppressive. Three 
boys stood together in the corridor, talking ; at their 
approach they sprang to attention, saluted, and stood rigid 
until they had passed them. It was an intimation to Joseph 



DAYS OF WRATH 287 

that Simeon must hold a relatively high rank in their 
organisation. 

They passed a door with another very young sentry in 
front and a muffled voice faintly audible from inside. It was 
a female contralto voice with a Sephardi accent, which was 
repeating a slow text in a monotone : 

This is the voice of Fighting Zion , the voice of liberated 
Jerusalem . Your kin is murdered in Europe ; what are you 
doing about it? This is the voice of Fighting Zion . They 
send them back in swimming coffins ; what are you doing about 
it ? This is the voice . 

“ Recording,” said Simeon. “ The transmitter is 
mobile.’’ 

It was the first bit of inside information Simeon had ever 
given him and Joseph couldn’t help feeling thrilled. There 
were intermittent short bursts from some automatic weapon, 
but though they must have been fairly close to the range, the 
sound of the firing was muffled. Simeon, who guessed 
Joseph’s unspoken question, smiled with the lower half of 
his face. 

“ We have got a fellow who was an expert in sound- 
isolation with a German aircraft firm,” he explained with 
suppressed pride in his voice. A man with a portfolio 
hurried past them who, while saluting, smiled at Simeon — 
a sight which gave Joseph a feeling of relief after the pathetic- 
ally earnest faces of the young sentries. They stopped at 
a door. “ Wait here for a moment,” said Simeon. He 
knocked and entered ; but almost on the doorstep he collided 
with Bauman coming out with brisk steps. 

Instead of his battered black leather jacket Bauman wore 
a newish brown one, but otherwise he looked less changed 
than Joseph had for some reason expected. He greeted 
Joseph, smiling all over his broad, comfortable face. Joseph 
felt relieved to see Bauman holding his hand out instead of 
giving the bent-arm salute. 

“ Funny to see one of the old faces again,” said Bauman. 
“ It doesn’t often happen since I’ve turned Fascist.” He 
spoke with good-humoured irony, without bitterness. 



288 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ Simeon has told me a lot about you,” he added, survey- 
ing Joseph with smiling but attentive eyes. 

“ He didn’t tell me much about you,” said Joseph with 
a grin. Bauman noticed that this grin was different from 
what it used to be. He remembered Joseph’s face always 
ready to crumple into a smile along certain fixed creases. 
Now it was a rather laborious process — as if the smile were 
searching for new folds in the skin along which to break. 

“ Listen,” said Bauman, “ I want a long talk with you, 
but first I’ve got to take a look at some new recruits. Or 
would you like to see for yourself ? They are yeshiva 
bochers .” 

“ It will be fun for you,” said Simeon. “ I must get 
along to my meeting ; see you later.” He saluted Bauman 
and walked down the corridor. 

“ Come along,” said Bauman. “ Let’s have a look at the 
bochers. Afterwards we’ll talk.” 

Yeshiva bochers were pupils of the orthodox Talmud 
schools in the Old City — relics of the Middle Ages. Joseph 
experienced a faint revulsion whenever he saw one of those 
awkward adolescents with love-locks slinking through the 
streets of Jerusalem — a prayer-book in one hand, the fore- 
finger of the other trailing along the walls, muttering to 
himself, blind to his surroundings. Sometimes a boy of 
eighteen, dressed in short black trousers and black cotton 
stockings, would cling to his father’s hand, trailing behind 
him like a small child. Sometimes there were two of them 
walking hand in hand, bumping into people like blind men, 
while arguing about scholastic subtleties. 

They walked along the corridor and entered a vaulted 
room which had once served as a wine-cellar to the owner 
of the house. A small barred window opening on the back 
area of the house was barricaded with sacks of cement to 
isolate sound and avoid suspicion. The bags had to be fitted 
and removed each night — a tiresome fatigue for the recruits. 

The room was lit by an oil-lamp on the stone floor, and 
next to the lamp squatted a youngster, studying in a book 
with moving lips. When Bauman and Joseph entered the 



DAYS OF WRATH 


289 

room he shoved the book carefully into a blue velvet bag and 
scrambled to his feet. He wore a black skull-cap and a grey 
felt hat on top ; his long side-locks dangled like corkscrews 
parallel to his cheeks which were covered with reddish down. 
His black cotton stockings were held by garters of string tied 
above the knees, and hung in loose wrinkles along his shins. 

“ Where are Gideon and the two others ? ” asked Bauman. 

“ They have gone to the r-ange,” the boy said in the 
traditional sing-song of the Orthodox. The range, installed 
in an ancient boiler-room, had space for only three people 
at a time. 

“ Stand to attention when you talk to me,” Bauman said 
in an even, not unfriendly tone. The boy pulled his shoulders 
up until they came almost level with his ears and made 
him look like a hunchback. His thick moist lips tried an 
ingratiating smile which gradually faded away ; his large 
brown eyes, like an Alsatian pup’s, hesitated between fear 
and devotion. 

“ What is that book you were reading ? ” asked Bauman. 

The boy gingerly handed him the blue velvet bag. The 
Star of David was embroidered on it in gold threads ; it was 
the traditional kind of bag in which the Orthodox carry their 
prayer-books and scarfs to the synagogue. Bauman opened 
it and took the book out. It was the Short Arms Manual , 
by D. Ras — the first Hebrew military manual, printed 
illegally by the organisation. The author’s pen-name was 
composed of the initials of the two leaders of the Command 
who had written it in collaboration, David Raziel and 
Abraham Stern. The book was a marvel of linguistic 
ingenuity, as Hebrew had as yet no words for fire-arms and 
even less for the two-hundred-odd parts of a modern auto- 
matic weapon. Raziel and Stern had undertaken the task 
with the twofold enthusiasm of Hebrew scholars and expert 
gunmen. The Language Board of the peaceful Hebrew 
University had unwittingly assisted them by giving advice 
to the alleged editors of an alleged technical dictionary. At 
the bottom of the dark-blue linen cover stood the only words 
in Latin characters which the book contained : “ Printed in 



290 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Geneva ”. That was a private joke of the authors — the 
book had been printed on an illegal press installed in the 
ghetto-warren of the Old City. 

Bauman fingered the book with a book-lover’s tenderness 
for a first edition. “ Well, how far have you got with it ? ” 
he asked. “ I haven’t said ‘ at ease ’ yet,” he added sharply. 

The boy’s shoulders jerked up again. “ You may examine 
me, sir,” he said. “ What page, plea-se ? ” 

Bauman looked at him. “ You mean that you are learning 
the whole book by heart ? ” 

“ What pa-age plea-se ? ” the boy asked, with the self- 
assurance of an infant prodigy. 

“ Page seventeen,” said Bauman. 

The boy passed his fingers before his eyes and after a 
few seconds his body began to sway forward and back in the 
rhythm of reciting a prayer : 

“. . . And the butt. If the ca-atch is forced do-own,” 
he recited, rocking himself, “ the small spring under the 
tri-igger blocks the mo-ovement of the second lever, and 
unless the le-ever is well oiled our weapon will ja-am. . . 

The oil-lamp stood next to the boy’s feet and threw his 
magnified shadow on the wall. The tall shadow swayed 
forward and backward like a mocking echo of his move- 
ments, the corkscrew side-locks flapping like pendulums 
across the ears. 

“ That will do,” said Bauman. He pulled with a quick 
movement his gun from the holster under his armpit and 
emptied the magazine into his palm. The boy watched him 
fascinatedly, peering down along his nose, his angular 
shoulders drawn up. 

“ Here,” said Bauman. “ Hold it.” 

The boy took the gun and held it pointing downward with 
a stiff arm, a little away from his body. Suddenly Bauman 
struck out at the boy’s wrist and the gun dropped to the 
floor. Bauman jumped one step back and forcefully slapped 
the boy in his face, first right then left, his arms swinging like 
flails. The boy stood with lifted shoulders, without defend- 
ing himself. 



DAYS OF WRATH 291 

“ That will teach you to hold fast to your gun,” said 
Bauman evenly. “ Take it again.” 

The boy picked up the gun from the floor. For a second 
he hesitated how best to hold it, then he took a step back 
and, holding the gun tight to his hip with elbow drawn 
back, pointed it at Bauman. His long yellow teeth were 
biting into his lip and there was a flicker in his brown eyes. 
One could see how the mere gesture of pointing the gun 
began to do things to him. A current seemed to flow back 
from the trigger and expand through his whole body, 
thawing its rigidity and giving it a tense, feline suppleness. 
His eyes narrowed and were steadily fixed on Bauman. 

“ That’s better,” said Bauman. 

The boy’s body at once relaxed, and his awkwardness 
returned. He put the gun into Bauman’s outstretched hand. 

“ Well ? ” said Bauman. 

The boy swallowed. “ I have deserved it, sir,” he said. 

“ Right,” said Bauman. “ You may carry on.” He 
turned on his heel and left the room, followed by Joseph. 

The boy, standing to attention, followed them with his 
eyes. He stood rigid until the door had closed and remained 
so for another second. Then he sighed, pulled his stockings 
up, tightened the strings above his knees and sat down on 
the floor by the lamp. He scratched his head, smiled un- 
certainly and took the book out of the prayer-bag. After a 
minute the world around him had faded once more while his 
lips went on mumbling, his body swaying, his side-locks 
flapping across his ears, his mocking giant-shadow rocking 
behind him in deep and solemn bows. 


16 


“ How do you like our Palace ? ” Bauman asked when they 
were back in his room. Like the other rooms, it had cement 
bags blocking the window and contained a deal table, a 
lamp and three chairs. “ Sit down,” he said, pushing a 



292 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

packet of cigarettes across the table to Joseph. 

“ It’s a highly effective setting,” said Joseph, feeling that 
this was the wrong kind of tone, but unable to find the 
right one, 

“ The trouble with you is,” said Bauman after a short 
pause, “ that you are a romantic ; and being ashamed of it 
you distrust anything which smacks of romantics — like 
darkened rooms and sentries in the street, which for us are 
elementary precautions. You are so determined not to take 
yourself seriously that you will persist in thinking it’s sheer 
make-believe even when they put a rope round your neck.” 

Joseph sat with his head bent and the sick-monkey smile 
on his face. “ Knowing me so well,” he said, “ do you still 
want me in your crowd ? ” 

“ Don’t be an ass,” said Bauman, looking at him across 
the table. 

Joseph wanted to pull himself together but found it 
difficult to do. He had expected so much from this meeting 
with Bauman, and now he felt like ringing the bell at the 
dentist’s when the tooth has already ceased to hurt. The 
tension had gone out of him and this whole interview seemed 
pointless and unreal. From time to time the muffled rattle 
of the range sounded through the wall, but that too seemed 
meaningless and dreamlike. 

“ I suppose I am too old to become a terror-boy-scout,’ 
he said. 

“ Who expects you to ? ” 

“ Simeon gave me some hints about the procedure of 
joining — six months’ apprenticeship, going through tests, 
taking the oath and so on.” 

“ Simeon is a pedantic donkey,” said Bauman, smiling 
broadly. “ If you come over to us you’ll have more im- 
portant jobs to do.” 

“ Such as ? ” said Joseph. 

“ We haven’t got anybody who’s been to an English 
university. You are a rare bird in Israel.” 

“ I loathe everything connected with propaganda.” 

“ Even speaking on an underground radio transmitter and 



DAYS OF WRATH 293 

turning out illegal leaflets, when you know that instead of a 
fee you get five years in jail if they get you ? ” 

Joseph smiled. 

“ A moment ago you promised me a rope, and now it’s 
only five years.” 

“ It isn’t quite as funny as that,” said Bauman. “ They have 
started third-degreeing our boys. The Police here is riddled 
with former Black and Tans who know this kind of job,” 

“ Simeon told me something about that,” Joseph said 
doubtfully. 

“ And you thought that he exaggerated,” said Bauman 
with a touch of sharpness. “ Actually Simeon doesn’t know 
yet all the details. One of our fellows, name of Benjamin 
Zeroni, escaped yesterday from Jerusalem prison. How he 
did it is quite a story which I shall tell you one day. I have 
spoken to him. Both his thumbs were dislocated as a result 
of being suspended by them for two hours. He was also 
beaten on the genitals, bastinadoed, and questioned while 
having water poured into his nostrils.” 

Bauman wiped his cheek with the palm of his hand and 
Joseph remembered the gesture — product of Bauman’s 
experiences with the humorous jailor in Graz. 

“ So far this only seems to happen in isolated cases,” 
Bauman continued, “ and it is possible that their high-ups 
are unaware of it. The man responsible, in all the four cases 
of which we know, is a certain Inspector C. We have sent 
him two warnings to stop. He has ignored them, so now 
we have to punish him. It will be the hell of a job, for since 
we sent the warnings he drives about with a bodyguard of 
two men armed with tommy-guns.” 

He spoke in his usual good-humoured voice with the 
broad Viennese accent. Joseph looked at him rather in- 
credulously, noting the euphemism “ to punish ” which 
Simeon too had repeatedly used when referring to the 
murder of the Mukhtar. 

“ I am telling you about this,” Bauman went on, “ be- 
cause it is one example of where you come in. I know little 
about England, except that it has the most influential and 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


294 

the worst-informed public opinion in the world. Its ignor- 
ance seems to grow in proportion to the unpleasantness of 
the facts. They know nothing about Hitler, or India, or 
their own slums. When they are forced to take notice there 
is a public outcry, but then it is usually too late. 

“ We here are ruled by a discreet department of their 
discreet Colonial Office. If their public knew what’s going 
on here, they would be horrified and perhaps do something 
about it. But they don’t. And the high-pitched voices of 
our Glicksteins will never reach their ears.” 

He lit a cigarette, threw the match on the floor and 
went on : 

“You have probably noticed that, unlike Simeon, I don’t 
hate the English. You know better than I that the type one 
meets in the Colonies is not representative. When I got out 
of Austria I spent six months in their country. They were 
kind and sympathetic, and had no idea what it was all about. 
They live on the moon, a gentle moon with green pastures 
and tennis-courts. When they touch our hot earth they 
lose their balance. But likes and dislikes aren’t the point. 
The point is that we need them and they need us. We need 
them because this country is under their control. They 
need us because the Arabs naturally want their independence 
and will double-cross them in an emergency, as they have 
done before. A Jewish State, tied to them by common 
European tradition and mutual interest, would be of much 
greater value to them than a standing garrison in a hostile 
native population. They had to withdraw step by step 
under pressure from Egypt and Iraq ; if Palestine becomes 
an Arab State they will sooner or later have to withdraw 
from here too ; if it becomes a Hebrew Dominion, it will 
be a solid and permanent bridgehead to the East. The more 
far-sighted of their statesmen knew this, hence their pledge 
to us. But their giants are dead or sulking, and their Empire 
is in a state of Wagnerian Gotterdammerung ; St. George 
has become tired of fighting the dragon and is trying to 
bribe it. They’ve put their island under an umbrella and 
we are left to swim in the drink. . . .” 



DAYS OF WRATH 


295 

Joseph had never heard Bauman so eloquent. Bauman 
squashed his cigarette with the determination of crushing a 
harmful insect, and went on : 

“ It follows that we have to do two things if we want to 
avoid drowning altogether. One is persuasion : proving to 
them that no dragon can be bribed, regardless of whether 
it’s a Teutonic, Roman, Arab or Jap dragon. Two is 
making a hell of a nuisance of ourselves. Driving each 
argument home with a bang. Otherwise they won’t listen. 
That’s where our Glicksteins go wrong. They squeak. 
They keep on piping what good boys we are. Result : a 
pat on the shoulder and a kick in the pants. A nation of 
conscientious objectors can’t survive. We have to force 
them to take us seriously, then they’ll do business with us. 
But to achieve that we have to speak the only language they 
understand. ...” He patted with his fist the gun under 
his leather jacket. “ That’s the new Esperanto,” he con- 
cluded. “ Surprising how easy it is to learn. Everybody 
understands it, from Shanghai to Madrid.” 

He leant back in the armless chair, his forearms with 
closed fists on the table, waiting for Joseph to speak. What 
he had said was not new to Joseph ; it was the logically un- 
assailable doctrine of the post- Genevan world. Whether the 
doctrine was propounded by the strong aiming at conquest, 
or by the weak aiming at survival, was merely a difference in 
degree, not in kind. For ultimately the strong too was ani- 
mated by fear and insecurity, and ultimately the weak had 
to resort to the same violent and detestable means. It was 
a global infection against which the only defence was to get 
contaminated oneself. 

But these were theoretical considerations. The reality 
was Mr. Brodetsky with his ear-trumpet crying “ was ist 
los ? ” and the wailing of the As stmt's sirens. Before these all 
moral scruples were but different forms of escape. 

“ Of course I have to agree with you,” said Joseph. “ But 
it would be dishonest to pretend that I do it with enthusiasm. 
You and I, Bauman, grew up in a different tradition.” 

“ So we did,” said Bauman. “ In the ’twenties. That 



296 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

was when Briand and Stresemann discussed the United 
States of Europe and King Feisal of Iraq welcomed the 
future Jewish State. So what ? ” 

“ Oh, I know,” said Joseph. “ It was a world of pink 
mirages and now we have entered the age of the New Realism. 
But it startles me that its up-to-date, stream-lined power 
logics should be accompanied by all this maudlin opera stuff 
— Wotan and Blood and Soil and Roman Fasces. And it’s 
the same among your arm-lifting terror-scouts. They think 
they are the heirs to young David and the Maccabeans. 
Between you and me, Bauman — if the Maccabeans hadn’t 
been such bloody heroes, our ancestors would have become 
Hellenised and would probably have escaped the ghetto. . . 

“ Oh, go to hell,” Bauman said abruptly. “ You’ve got 
that intellectual squint which makes you see both sides of 
the medal at the same time. You are more Jewish in spirit 
than that Talmud student with his love-locks. ...” 

He got up and began pacing up and down the room. 

“ To see both sides is a luxury we can no longer afford. 
We are moving into a political ice age. We have to build 
our Eskimo huts and national fires, or perish. ...” With 
his hands in his pockets and head thrust forward, he looked 
as if he were going to charge the wall with his skull. 

“You still cling to the ’twenties when it looked as if it 
was going to be spring and frontiers and classes were to melt 
away in the red sun. Well, that’s finished. As far as I am 
concerned it was finished when little Dollfuss shot our big 
red Vienna into shambles. Up to that day I thought Jewish 
nationalism just as bloody as any other, and the Return a 
romantic stunt. When they locked me up I had time to 
think it over and decided that the moment had come for us 
to stop redeeming the world, and to start redeeming our- 
selves. We can’t wait until socialism solves all racial 
problems. That will perhaps happen one day, but long 
before that day we shall have been exterminated. There is 
a time-lag we can’t jump over. Oh, if we had time, if the 
others would only wait. . . . You know, Joseph, you are the 
philosopher, not I — but it seems to me that time is a 



DAYS OF WRATH 


297 

dimension of politics, and that idealists always forget to 
reckon with this dimension ; that’s why their picture seems 
so flat. If time allowed for jumps we wouldn’t have to wade 
through all this mud. . . .” 

He stopped short in the middle of the room. 

“ There we are back to fundamentals. I thought you had 
thrashed that out with yourself some six or seven years ago 
when you decided to come to this country.” 

“ I had, ’’said Joseph. “ But at that time we hoped that this 
nationalism of ours would be different, and that we were going 
to build a socialist model State. Not an Eskimo hut — but 
Ezra’s Tower. And to some extent we have succeeded.” 

“ I have no quarrel with Ezra’s Tower,” said Bauman, 
regaining his good temper. “ But those lovable idiots think 
they have a quarrel with me. They are working hard and 
have no time for politics, so their roots are still in the 
’twenties and their heads in the clouds. They are pacifists 
and legalists like all honest-to-God Social Democrats, and if 
we left it to them we should share the fate which befell their 
comrades in Austria, Germany, Italy and so on — who all 
lived in their own Ezra’s Tower. I love them, but I hate 
their muddled thinking.” 

“ I have often wondered,” said Joseph with a grin, 
“ whether I don’t prefer Rousseau’s muddle to Robespierre’s 
clarity.” 

“ Oh, shut up,” said Bauman. “ Of course you don’t. 
Your pals in Ezra’s Tower need the British, but they object 
to British Imperialism. They want to build a nation, but 
they object to the paraphernalia of nationalism. ...” He 
resumed his pacing up and down the room. 

“ It can’t be done without the paraphernalia. That’s the 
answer to your quibbling about our opera stuff. Our boys 
have to run greater risks than ordinary soldiers. If caught 
they are not treated as prisoners but tried as criminals. They 
need discipline ; and there is no discipline without a ritual. 
... It is against reason that a man should walk into 
machine-gun fire because another man tells him to. But 
soldiering is based on the irrational assumption that he 

v 



298 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

ought to do so. Therefore every army must have its tradi- 
tion and its myth. That’s where the Bible and the Macca- 
beans come in with us. Whether you and I like it or not 
makes no difference. There is no contradiction between 
what you call the New Realism and the New Mythology. 
You can’t lead a high-pressure movement through rationally 
controlled channels, and you can’t freeze up emotion. In 
normal times emotion finds normal outlets, but in a political 
ice age it bursts out in volcanic myths. 

“ You once said to me that we are nationalists faute de 
mieux. That’s true enough of you and me, but you can’t 
expect my boys to work up much enthusiasm for it. Nobody 
will choose to die faute de mieux . ...” 

There was a silence, and the muffled rattling through the 
wall. At last Joseph said : 

“ You win, Bauman — as usual. I have to agree with 
you > faute de mieux. . . .” He grinned wearily. “So what’s 
the next step ? ” 

Bauman had wandered back behind his desk and resumed 
his seat. 

“ You are quite decided to take the plunge ? ” he asked. 

Joseph nodded. Bauman looked at him doubtfully. 

“ You didn’t sound it,” he said. 

“ It was only a kind of rearguard action,” said Joseph with 
an apologetic grin. “ I like to have my i 9 s properly dotted.” 

Bauman looked unconvinced. “ In your present mood 
it is difficult to talk business with you. Simeon told me you 
were shaken by Dina’s death, but I didn’t realise to what 
extent. This faute de mieux talk is a disparagement of your 
own past — as if you bespattered everything you’ve done 
during the last six years.” 

Joseph shrugged. “ I asked you at the beginning of our 
talk whether you still wanted me. You told me not to be 
an ass. I cannot pretend. At present I don’t feel par- 
ticularly enthusiastic — about anything. I suppose that will 
improve with time. Meanwhile what precisely do you want 
me to do ? My leave expires next week and I have got to 
tell them at home what I’ve decided.” 



DAYS OF WRATH 299 

“ Oh — there is no need to tell them anything,” Bauman 
said with some reluctance. 

“ So you don’t want me ? ” 

“ Of course we do.” 

“ Then what ? ” 

Bauman began marching up and down again. 

“ Naturally we have discussed you — in the Command,” 
he said, even more hesitatingly than before. He sounded 
as if he were talking against his own conviction. “ We have 
even worked out a kind of plan how to make the best use 
of you. It is roughly this. You tell the fellows in your 
Commune that you have changed your mind and won’t 
have any truck with us bloody Fascists. You carry on with 
your present job. It will give you the best cover towards 
the Police — much better than going underground. People 
from the Settlements are all on the side of the angels. In 
your spare time you do a bit of subversive propaganda for 
us. Twice a week — in Tel Aviv or here — you meet 
someone from us ; once to discuss and deliver the written 
stuff — leaflets and so on ; once for recording. We have 
the means of making your voice sound different on the air 
so that you won’t be recognised. — That’s about all. . . .” 

He eyed Joseph rather anxiously. While he spoke Joseph 
had looked as if he was going to interrupt and protest, but 
he hadn’t. He felt the need to digest the opposing emotions 
roused in him. The first had been a violent revulsion at the 
idea that he should deceive Reuben, Moshe, Ellen and all the 
rest of them at home. The second was a sudden and glorious 
flash of relief at the thought that he wouldn’t have to leave 
them. It was the same overwhelming emotion he had ex- 
perienced during that memorable talk with Reuben when 
he had also thought at first that he would be cast out. But 
on that occasion he had been fully conscious of what Ezra’s 
Tower meant to him, whereas this time he had deceived 
himself into believing that he was through. Only now 
that he saw a chance to avoid the breach did he realise the 
unbearable wrench which it would mean. 

“ Well,” Bauman said, “ what do you think of it ? ” 



300 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ 111 have to think it over,” said Joseph. 

“ Moral scruples ? ” said Bauman. “ They would be 
justified if your private activities would be damaging to 
them. In fact, the contrary is true. Your first contact with 
us led to the action against the Mukhtar, and I am convinced 
every one of your saintly hypocrites secretly rejoiced about 
it. Besides, no community should have the right to control 
the political activities of its members, as long as these are 
broadly in keeping with its aims.” 

“ You are a bloody Machiavelli,” said Joseph. 

“ It’s the logic of the ice age,” said Bauman. “ We have 
to use violence and deception, to save others from violence 
and deception.” 

Joseph gave no answer. Already his momentary elation 
was followed by a new wave of disgust at choosing that easy 
way out. Reuben had showed him the way out of that first 
crisis — had enabled him to eat his cake and have it — 
and now Bauman was doing the same. But he was too 
weary to argue about Ends and Means — for that was what 
the whole question finally boiled down to. This was no 
time for soul-searching. Who was he to save his integrity 
while others had their bodies hacked to pieces ? In the logic 
of the ice age tolerance became a luxury and purity a vice. 
There was no way to escape the dilemma. To wash one’s 
hands and let others do the dirty job was a hypocrisy, not a 
solution. To expose oneself was the only redeeming: 
factor. . . . 

“ Oh, damn it all,” he said helplessly. “ I wish to God 
you would let me take part in an action — even if only one. 
Then at least I wouldn’t have the feeling that it’s all been 
made easy and cheap for me. ...” 

“ If you think five years for a broadcast is cheap ...” 
Bauman began wearily — then suddenly he checked himself 
in the middle of the sentence, swerved round and with a 
broad grin took two steps towards Joseph. He laid his hands 
heavily on Joseph’s shoulders, pressing him against the wall. 

“ You want action ? ” he said. “ You are sure you 
really want it ? ” 



DAYS OF WRATH 


301 

Joseph looked at him with a sudden hope. Looking into 
Bauman's face from so close, he saw the yellow malaria 
colour as a foundation under the taut, dry, brown skin. 
Bauman squeezed his shoulders, then took his hands away. 

“ All right,” he said. “ I have an idea. . . .” 

He didn't tell Joseph his idea — which was that Joseph 
was going to pieces, and that the best remedy for a man 
going to pieces was to give him a dangerous job, in the 
course of which he would either get killed or cured. It was 
a drastic kind of psychology but it had worked once or twice 
on Bauman himself and so he assumed it must work on 
others as well. He was quite electrified at the prospect of 
the magic cure he had found for Joseph. 

“ Listen,” he said in an excited schoolboy whisper. “ If 
you must have action, you shall have it. We are preparing 
a job where I could fit you in. It's a highly irregular thing 
to do, but I am going to take a chance. The condition is that 
afterwards you work with us on the lines I told you. ...” 

“ All right,” Joseph said quickly, infected by Bauman's 
excitement. He felt as if his pulse had been abnormally 
slowed down during the past weeks and was returning at 
last to its habitual rhythm. His heart went out to Bauman. 
“ You are a prop,” he said. 

“lama bloody Fascist,” said Bauman. He looked at his 
watch. “ I've got to go,” he said. “ We're swearing in a 
new recruit. More opera stuff. Do you want to see it ? 
That's irregular too, but the Command knows about you. 
You just have to look as if you belonged.” 


17 

They walked along more corridors, past the room where the 
girl was still recording in her monotonous voice, then stopped 
at a door with two sentries outside. The sentries saluted 
and so did Bauman ; Joseph had to follow his example. 
Reluctantly he confessed to himself that he did not really 



302 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

dislike it; the sudden tightening of the body and the 
precise, mechanised gesture was a shake-up and pull- 
together. In every man there is a little cadet who wants to 
click his heels, he thought, suppressing a grimace. 

He followed Bauman into a room lit by candles. Facing 
the door, two men were sitting behind a table with a third 
empty chair between them. They rose as Bauman entered 
and there was more saluting. Along the wall stood some 
more men, who also snapped to attention. They were all 
between twenty and thirty, and had the air of young men 
from good families — with keen but reserved faces, well- 
groomed hair and the slightly self-conscious courtesy of an 
officers’ mess. Bauman introduced Joseph as a “ guest ” 
without mentioning his name and without further comment. 
They all shook hands with him, polite and unsmiling. Then 
Bauman sat down on the empty chair at the table, and the 
men on either side of him followed his example. The one 
on Bauman’s right was a sharp-featured intellectual with 
rimless glasses and a tense, aggressive face. The man on 
his left was tall, slim and elegant, and looked like a pro- 
fessional gambler. The table behind which they sat was 
covered with a blue-and-white national flag in silk. In the 
centre of the flag an old parchment map of the country was 
spread out. To the right of the map was placed a leather- 
bound Bible ; to its left a revolver. Five blue burning 
candles stood upright in a silver menorah , the five-branched 
candlestick, emblem of the Maccabean dynasty. 

“ Let’s begin,” said Bauman. He was the only one in the 
room with an easy and informal manner. Joseph took his 
place among the other young men standing lined up with 
their backs to the wall. He had gathered that they were 
junior officers of the organisation, while Bauman and the 
two others seated behind the table were members of the 
Command. There was a tense silence in the room, emphas- 
ised by the flicker of the candles. 

Bauman read out from a piece of paper the name — which 
was an alias — of the candidate, and at a sign from him the 
young officer standing next to the door opened it and gave 



DAYS OF WRATH 


303 

an order to the sentry in the corridor. The sentry called 
out the name, and presently a young boy entered through 
the door, which closed behind him. He saluted and advanced 
three steps until he stood in front of the table. He must have 
been told beforehand what to do, for there was no hesitation 
about him. He might have been about seventeen and had 
blue eyes and smooth fair hair parted in the middle, and 
looked the type of boy who in school is called “ babyface ” 
and resents it. At this moment he gave the impression of 
being in a trance. While he stood rigidly to attention, his 
wide-open eyes were fixed for a second or two on the flame of 
the candles, skirted the Bible and stuck fascinatedly on the 
revolver. 

“ Kiss the Bible and touch the gun,” said Bauman, rising 
to his feet followed by the other two behind the desk. The 
boy did as bidden. It was so still that one could hear the 
small, damp noise of his lips touching the leather cover of 
the book. 

“ Now speak the words after me,” said Bauman. “ In 
the name of the All-present who brought Israel out of the house 
of bondage in Egypt . . 

“ In the name . . the boy repeated in a dreamy voice, 
looking with puckered brows into the candle. 

“ . . . not to rest until the Nation is resurrected as a free 
and sovereign State within its historic boundaries , from Dan 
to Bersheba . . . 

“ . . . from Dan to Bersheba .” 

“ To obey blindly my superior officers . . .” 

“ . . . officers . . 

“ . . . not to reveal anything entrusted to me , neither 
under threats nor bodily torture ; and that I will bear my 
sufferings in silence .” 

“ . . . in silence” 

The candles flickered and one could hear the boy’s 
breathing. In a dreamy, entranced voice he repeated the 
last words of the oath : 

“ If I forget thee, Jerusalem ...” 

“ If I forget thee , Jerusalem ...” 



304 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

u ... as long as my soul resides in my body” 

“ . . . in my body. Amen” 

For the full length of a minute Bauman said nothing and 
let everybody stand to attention. In the tense silence one 
could feel how the significance of the moment sank into the 
boy’s soul, to leave its indelible mark there. Every nerve in 
Joseph’s body craved to cry out at them to stop, that they 
had no right to do this to a child. He tried to evoke Dina’s 
mutilated face in the open coffin, but it did not help and did 
not connect. We shall never be forgiven this, he thought, 
for we know what we do. 

And we should never be forgiven, he answered himself, 
if we omitted to do it. 

“ Dismiss,” said Bauman. 

The boy turned about and marched out of the room, 
with the precise movements of an automaton. 

Later, when Joseph took his leave from Bauman in the 
corridor, Bauman asked him : 

“ What did you think of it ? ” 

“ I thought,” said Joseph, “ that I did not envy you. I 
would rather obey than command.” 

“ Who would not ? ” said Bauman. 

The yellow malaria colour of his cheeks seemed more 
pronounced now, but perhaps it was merely the pallid light 
of the oil-lamp. 


* 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 
(i939) 


**. . . And indeed that was a time most fertile in all manner 
of wicked practices, in so much that no kind of evil deeds 
were then left undone ; nor could any one so much as 
devise any bad thing that was new, so deeply were they all 
infected. 5 * 

(Flavius Josephus, The Wars of the Jews'), 




THE DAY OF VISITATION (1939) 


1 

The uncertainty about the country's future was brought to an 
end on May the ijth. On this day the British Government 
issued a Statement of Policy , known as the White Paper of 
1939 , which was meant as a final settlement of the Palestine 
problem . 

“ It has been urged ”, the Statement ran , “ that the ex- 
pression c a National Home for the Jewish people ' offered a 
prospect that Palestine might in due course become a Jewish 
State or Commonwealth . His Majesty's Government therefore 
now declare unequivocally that it is not part of their policy that 
Palestine should become a Jewish State'' 

It was an unusually candid political document . For the 
next five years a last batch of Jews , numbering seventy-five 
thousand in all , was to be allowed to scramble in before the doors 
were closed ; then , from June 1944 to the end of the world , no 
further Jews were to be allowed to enter Palestine . By June 
1944 , the document reckoned , the Hebrew community would have 
reached one-third of the total population of the country . From 
then onward , owing to the disparity of birth-rates and unre- 
stricted Arab immigration , it was condemned proportionally to 
fall to a smaller and smaller minority , To prevent any 
economic expansion of this minority , the High Commissioner 
of Palestine was further empowered to prohibit the purchase of 
land by Jews . Making use of these powers , the Land Transfer 
Acts of February 1940 restricted the zone in which Jews were 
free to buy land to five per cent of the total area of the 
country . The National Home had become transformed into one 
more cramped oriental ghetto with sealed gates . 

In the Parliamentary debate which followed a few days later, 
the Right Hon . Winston Churchill {Conservative) called the 

307 



308 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

White Paper “ a plain breach of promise, a base betrayal , the 
filing of a petition in moral and physical bankruptcy , a new 
Munich and an act of abjection Sir Archibald Sinclair 
( Liberal ) declared that “ arbitrary prohibition of Jewish 
immigration without any corresponding restriction of Arab 
immigration , introducing an element of discrimination against 
the Jews on grounds of race and religion — these things are grave 
departures from the terms of the Mandate , and they call in 
question our moral right to continue to hold it ". Mr . Herbert 
Morrison (Labour) declared that his Party regarded “ this 
White Paper and the policy in it as a cynical breach of pledges 
given to the world " ; and that he “ would have had more 
respect for the Colonial Secretary and his speech if he had 
frankly admitted that the Jews were to be sacrificed to the incom- 
petence of the Government in the matter , to be sacrificed to its 
apparent fear , if not indeed its sympathy with violence and the 
methods of murder and assassination 

According to the terms of the international Mandate , the 
White Paper could only gain legal validity if endorsed by the 
League of Nations . The League's Permanent Mandates Com- 
mission met on June x6 and found unanimously that the new 
policy contradicted the terms of Britain's trusteeship . The last 
word now rested with the League's Council It was to meet in 
September iggg . It never met , and the White Paper never 
acquired legal validity. 

Its provisions , however , were implemented point by point : 
the sale of land to Jews was prohibited in g^S per cent of their 
homeland , access to it was refused to survivors of the great 
massacre , and shiploadsful of them drowned in ig4i and '42 
in the waters of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea. Those 
who succeeded in getting ashore were sent to prison or deported 
to Eritrea , the Sudan or the Island of Mauritius ; helpers in 
the work of rescue were treated as criminals and given long 
sentences of imprisonment. A document with no legal validity 
became the legal guide of Government , Law Courts and Police ; 
lawlessness reigned as the supreme law in the Holy Land . 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 


309 


2 

The reign of lawlessness began on the very evening of the 
new policy’s inauguration. It began at precisely 8 p.m., 
the hour at which the Palestine Radio was to broadcast 
the official text of the White Paper in Arabic. 

At that hour, Issa, son of the late Mukhtar of Kfar Tabi- 
yeh, was sitting with two newly won acquaintances on the 
terrace of the little Arab coffee-house near Bab el Mandeb, 
the Damascus Gate, waiting for the broadcast to begin. The 
proprietor of the coffee-house, who had once been a follower 
of the moderate Nashashibi clan, and whose establishment 
had been burnt down by the Mufti’s followers during the 
riots of 1937, had specially installed a loudspeaker for the 
occasion to prove his patriotic feelings. 

Issa had come to Jerusalem to arrange with the Arab 
Bank certain matters in connection with the Mukhtar’s 
death. He wore a cream-coloured suit with pink stripes, 
patent leather shoes with white suede inlays, and a black 
armlet as a sign of mourning. It was his first visit to the 
capital, and he successfully hid his excitement under a mask 
of blase boredom. The circumstances of his father’s death 
had caused a certain stir and had helped Issa to gain access 
to circles of high Arab society not usually open to an obscure 
village Mukhtar’s son. His two companions he had only 
met the day before, at one of the weekly “ at homes” of 
Mme Makropoulos, widow of Josef Makropoulos, the 
author of Pan- Arab Renaissance . Mme Makropoulos had a 
political salon where the higher British officials and visiting 
celebrities met the Arab intelligentsia in an easy and civilised 
atmosphere — and where they could relax from the strain of 
intense and purposeful Jewish hospitality where Banquo’s 
ghost kept cropping up from under the dinner-table. Issa 
had been taken to the party by a Director of the Arab Bank 
and was also armed with a letter of introduction from District 
Officer Tubashi. He had been received with kindly sym- 



310 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

pathy which helped him to overcome his shyness and assume 
the r6le of a martyr of the Cause, which from that moment 
onward he genuinely felt himself to be. 

The two other young men, seated on low wicker stools 
and sipping black coffee while waiting for the broadcast to 
start, belonged to the new Arab intelligentsia. Farid, a 
dark, lanky young man, had the untidy and romantic ap- 
pearance, the tweedy nonchalance and languid air of an 
Oxford undergraduate. He came from one of the oldest 
Arab families in Jerusalem, had been educated by an English 
private tutor, wrote English poetry, and articles against 
English Imperialism in the Arab El Difa. Salla, his best 
friend, was a round-faced dandy with a clipped blond 
moustache. The two of them had been planning for over 
a year to launch the first Arab literary weekly, but had so far 
been unable to find the necessary financial backing. 

Issa, anxious to show his lights, had just told them a 
smutty story from Beyrout but had met with cool dis- 
approval ; to ease the silence he hummed the popular jingle : 
F alas tin baladna , Yahud kalabna , Palestine is our country 
the Jews are our dogs — but that did not cut much ice either. 
There was still about a quarter of an hour left until the’ 
broadcast was due to start, and Salla ordered more coffee. 
“ Would you like a nargileh ? ” he asked, turning politely 
to Issa. Issa longed for one but thought that smoking a 
water pipe would be considered provincial and boorish. 
“ No, thank you, I only smoke cigarettes,” he said. Salla 
offered his silver case and they both lit cigarettes, but Farid 
refused, shaking his head with the dark, wavy hair which 
had a tendency to fall over his brow. “ I shall have a 
nargileh,” he said. Then, with one of his sudden changes 
from languidness to enthusiasm, he turned briskly to Issa. 

“ When we start our magazine you must write us an 
article about Arab village life,” he said. 

Issa grinned, half flattered, half incredulous. <e Village 
life ? ” he said. “ What is there to write about ? The 
fellaheen are stupid, backward and filthy.” 

“ That is just the point,” said Salla, his chin propped on 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 3** 

the silver knob of his walking-stick. “ We must rouse the 
fellah from his apathy. Look at the Hebrews.” 

“ Ah, the Hebrews,” said Issa. “ They use tractors and 
fertilisers and imported livestock. They've got the money.” 

“ Surely you must have enough money in Kfar Tabiyeh 
to buy fertilisers and even a tractor,” said Farid, with the 
mouthpiece of the water pipe between his teeth. 

“ Ah — but we lack co-operation,” said Issa. 

“ But that is just the point,” cried Salla. “ Lack of co- 
operation. Jealousy and blood feuds. Ignorance. Super- 
stition. A mediaeval economy. That is what we have to 
fight.” He was thumping his chin after each phrase with the 
walking-stick. 

“ Ye-es,” said Issa. “ But the younger ones all want to 
run away to the towns where they get wages and can go to 
the cinema.” 

“ And sell the land to the Jews,” said Salla. 

“Ah — so it is,” Issa agreed. “ The Jews have the 
money. And the prices they pay ! I could tell you 
stories . . .” 

He hastily checked himself, and his eyes shifted round 
the tables in the neighbourhood. They were mainly occu- 
pied by small shopkeepers from the shuks, with a sprinkling 
of villagers and Beduins from Transjordan. The terrace was 
more crowded than usual because of the broadcast and the 
historic events, but the men all sat peacefully sucking their 
nargilehs or playing tauleh, the ancestor of backgammon, with 
an air of laziness and content. 

Farid sat with his legs stretched out, elbows on knees, 
sucking at the tube and watching the bubbles in the glass 
bowl. With his high forehead, dreamy eyes and sensuous 
lips he looked attractive and he probably knew it. He was 
a frequent guest at the rather dull parties of the English 
colony, and having had some of his poems printed in the 
Jerusalem Mail , was a favourite with the middle-aged and 
intellectually inclined among the English women. Young 
Farid, who was twenty and a virgin, allowed himself to be 
spoiled with a languid and blas6 air. He knew from one 



312 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

painful experience that all European women were “ teasers ”, 
and was careful not to expose himself to humiliation. 
Besides, he was in love with his three years older cousin 
Raissa, daughter of a Syrian patriot who had escaped being 
hanged by the Turks in 1916 and was shot by the French 
in 1926. 

“ It is a curious thing,” he said dreamily. “ These Jews 
come from the towns of Europe to become peasants — and 
our peasants all want to run away to the towns.” 

“ Ah ! ” said Issa. “ It is very bad.” 

“ Well, what about that article for our magazine ? ” 
asked Salla. 

“ I don't know,” said Issa. “ I have never written 
poetry before.” 

“ Poetry ? ” asked Salla, arching his eyebrows and lifting 
his chin by means of the stick. 

“ There you see,” Farid said gloomily. “ Even our youth 
still identifies writing with poetry. And what poetry ! 

4 My beloved's lips are red corals, her teeth are shining 
pearls, her haunches like a cedar tree ', all over again.” 

“ I did not really mean it,” said Issa, who had grown 
copper red. He particularly resented being placed in the 
category of “ our youth ” by this badly-dressed town boy 
who was probably younger than he and did not know what 
a woman is. Ah, if he could only tell them about that 
Hebrew bitch. 

“ Anyway,” said Salla, in a tactful attempt to turn the 
conversation. “ All this is going to change now. Once the 
Hebrews are prevented from buying up the land and tempting 
the fellah, the rush to the towns will stop. By God, it was 
time the English did something about it.” 

“ Do you believe they did it for our sake ? ” said Farid. 
“ They don't want more Jews to come in because they are 
even more afraid of the Jews than they are of us ; that is all.” 

“ Falastin baladna , Yahud kalabna ,” suggested Issa, trying 
to regain the lost ground. 

Salla ignored him. “For whatever reason they do it, I 
can only say hamduVillah and praise God for it,” he said, 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 3*3 

knocking his stick for emphasis against the floor. 

“ You will soon put on a tarbush,” said Farid, and they 
both laughed. The red tarbush had been the emblem of the 
moderate Nashashibi party, and since their leading members 
had been bumped off by the Patriots, it had practically dis- 
appeared from the country. On the terrace everybody wore 
either Arab headgear or was bareheaded as they themselves 
were. 

“ But seriously/’ said Farid in a changed voice. “ I admit 
that this White Paper is the first fair move of the British for 
twenty years — since they so generously promised our 
country to the Jews without asking us. . . .” He made a 
pause : when Farid talked seriously he was very careful in 
the choice of his words. “ But this much admitted, you 
have still to see that it does not go far enough to repair the 
fantastic injustices of the past. All Arab States have their 
Parliaments — we are denied it because it would give us a 
majority over the Jews. Egypt and Iraq have attained inde- 
pendence — but though Iraq is a country of savages com- 
pared to us, they ask us to wait another ten years until we 
are granted the same international status. Who knows how 
often they will change their minds in these ten years, as 
they did in the past ? It is all or nothing — and now.” 

Issa looked at him open-mouthed. He had never before 
heard anybody speak so cleverly and with such a beautiful 
choice of words. 

Salla nodded, silently acknowledging his friend’s superi- 
ority. “ It is almost time,” he said, looking at his watch. 
At the same moment the proprietor of the cafe switched on 
the wireless and the loudspeaker on the terrace began to 
crackle. It was a few minutes early and the Hebrew 
Children’s Hour was still on. For a few seconds a warm, 
husky, girl’s voice spoke in an amplified whisper to the 
mute crowd on the terrace. She spoke the words of a 
Hebrew nursery rhyme ; her voice sounded so close that 
they thought they could feel her warm breath exhaled through 
the loudspeaker. They listened with expressionless faces, 
their eyes on the bubbling pipes, to the rhymed words of a 

x 



314 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

language so kin to their own. . . And the sailors stuffed 
wax into their ears,” Farid quoted to Salla, who smiled 
appreciatively, while rapping the silver knob against his 
teeth. Issa wondered what sailors they were talking about 
but did not really care. He thought of the Hebrew girl, 
and the fury of his unappeased desire for her paled the 
pock-marked skin of his face. 

“ Peace with you, children,” the voice whispered, fading 
away in a smile ; and for about twenty seconds there was 
silence. Then a male, factual voice announced the next 
item on the programme : a summary of the Government’s 
Statement of Policy for Palestine, in Arabic. The faces on the 
terrace grew a little tenser. They waited in silence. A sharp 
and very loud crack came from the loudspeaker ; — then 
nothing. The silence continued for an entire minute, then 
for a second and third one ; the only sound on the terrace 
came from the tauleh players slamming down their disks. 

“ Have you killed your radio, ya Ahmed ? ” a fat man 
shouted at the proprietor. Some men laughed. “ It is in 
order, by God, but it has gone dumb,” the proprietor said 
in an anxious voice. He was frightened lest the Patriots 
should make him responsible for the trouble and burn his 
awnings and wicker stools for a second time. 

Suddenly the loudspeaker spoke again. It was a different 
announcer this time and he sounded rather flustered. 
He explained in Arabic, and then repeated in the two other 
languages, that for technical reasons the broadcast of the 
Statement of Policy had to be postponed for an hour and 
a half. Meanwhile the station would send recorded Arab 
music. 

A low murmur went over the terrace ; then the players 
resumed rolling their dice and slamming down their disks 
with the mechanical movements of a lifetime’s routine. 

Salla rapped the floor furiously with his stick. “ Oh, the 
hyenas, they have changed their minds again,” he cried. 

“ Idiot,” said Farid quietly. “ You heard the broadcast 
from London. They can’t change a Government Statement 
in an hour.” 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 3*5 

“ But what happened ? what happened, in the name 
of God?” 

“ Most likely the Jews have blown up the radio station 
in Ramallah.” 

“ Ah ! perhaps,” said Salla, regaining hope. “ Yes, 
surely that is it,” he added, already convinced. “ But that 
won’t help them.” 

“ No,” said Farid, stirring the live coal in the small 
metal cup on top of the glass bowl. 

“ But all the same — they have courage, those children 
of death,” Salla said, twisting his moustache in reluctant 
admiration. 

“ They have learned from us,” said Farid, who was 
practising English equanimity. 

Issa looked at them with gloomy dislike. He thought of 
the two dark figures who had come at night to fetch his 
father, and once more that icy ripple of fear ran through 
him, receded, and swept through him again, with the pitiless 
monotony of the tide. 


3 

The cable connecting the broadcasting studio in Jerusalem with 
the transmitting station in Ramallah had been cut at 8 p.m., 
precisely at the minute when the broadcast was to start , by 
members of the “ Haganah A convoy of armed cars carrying 
the Director of Programmes and his staff was at once dispatched 
to Ramallah . 

At g.30 p.m ., by the time the broadcast was resumed, a 
crowd had assembled in front of the District Commissioner's 
Offices in Tel Aviv ; they sang the anthem , stormed the District 
Offices , tore up the records of the Immigration and Land 
Registry Departments , threw the furniture through the windows , 
hoisted the Zionist flag and set fire to the building . 

At io p.m., by the time the British Police had succeeded in 
dispersing the rioters, the Central Immigration Department in 



316 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Jerusalem was burning too ; when the fire brigade arrived the 
building was gutted and the files containing the lists of illegal 
immigrants earmarked for deportation had been destroyed . 

At ii p.m., by the time the Jerusalem fire had been put out , 
a new demonstration marched down Allenby Road in Tel Aviv 
and clashed with reinforced British Police . The Military Com- 
mander of the District imposed a curfew upon the town y and for 
the remaining hours of the night the country slept an uneasy 
sleeps until the Day of Visitation dawned. 

This was the name given to the day by the National Council 
of the Hebrew Community , who had chosen it from Isaiah : 

And what will ye do in the day of visitation , and in the 
desolation which shall come from far ? to whom will ye flee for 
help ? 

To whom indeed? For a few days the Press and public 
opinion in Britain denounced the strangling of the National 
Home ; American public figures protested against the “ tear- 
ing up of a pact with the conscience of mankind ” ; there was 
the usual hue and cry as in the case of the Chinese , the Spaniards 
and the Czechs. Then all grew tired and quiet , and the law of 
universal indifference had its way ; for the conscience of man- 
kind is a diffuse kind of vapour which only rarely condenses into 
working steam . 

And so the Day of Visitation dawned. 

From early in the morning groups of boys and girls 
marched in military formation through Jerusalem. The 
Hebrew National Council, led by Glickstein, had proclaimed 
that it should be a day of protest with (orderly) processions, 
(peaceful) demonstrations and a complete stoppage of work 
(in all but the essential Government services). There was 
also to be a national registration of volunteers who were to 
pledge themselves to be ready for any emergency. The 
street walls and hoardings were plastered with posters bear- 
ing slogans like “ We were here before the British and shall 
be here when they are gone ” and “ For Zion’s sake will I 
not hold my peace and for Jerusalem’s sake will I not rest 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 


317 

The formations converged towards the football ground 
of the Hebrew Secondary School in the new residential 
quarter of Rechavia. All wore khaki shorts, and their 
political affiliation was only expressed in the colour of their 
shirts. For once all hostile factions were marching together. 
They paraded on the football ground, before a blue-and- 
white national flag at half mast. Glickstein made a speech 
calling them to fight the new policy to the last drop of their 
blood, but without violence and disorder. Nobody quite 
knew what he meant but it did not matter. There were 
several thousands of them, tightly packed between the two 
goals of the football ground with its cropped dry grass burnt 
yellow by the sun ; the heat, emotion and perspiration fused 
them together into one coloured lump with a collective odour, 
voice and impulse, ready for anything. At the end of the 
meeting the order was given out to march in close formation 
down Ben Yehuda Street to Zion Circus ; but on leaving 
the stadium they found the street barred by a cordon of 
Police. At once the formation broke up and merged again 
into an amorphous clot, as when the molecular structure 
of a solid is melted down to a thick, semi-liquid mass ; and 
as its internal heat increased this seething mass began to 
throw out bubbles which burst and disintegrated against the 
firm wall of the Police ; it could be foreseen that in a minute 
or so the whole mass would boil over. Shouts went up and 
soared in shrill flutterings over the heads of the dense crowd 
of adolescents ; behind them the smaller children pushed 
and shrieked in hysterical elation, ready to throw themselves 
upon the rifles and tommy-guns, which for them were but 
magnified models of tin. The hard-jawed policemen looked 
expressionlessly at this strange and vocal Eastern crowd 
which they over-towered by a head’s length and the like of 
which they had never seen before ; then, at an order of their 
Commander, who had been calmly parleying with an agitated 
Glickstein, they gave way and watched the unruly crowd 
pass by — most of them with considerable relief and a few 
with regret. Behind their broken line the procession re- 
formed with cries of triumph and contempt ; the blue-and- 



318 thieves in the night 

white streamers floated once more over their heads in the 
blazing sun, asking for refuge for their murdered kin, and for 
the Hebrew State. 

About the same hour, still before noon, a different crowd 
had assembled in the Synagogue of Yeshurun, the largest and 
most modern of the many prayer-houses in Jerusalem. They 
were all old or elderly people, about five thousand of them. 
Wrapped in their gold- and silver-spun praying scarves, the 
men stood in rows between the ascending grades of pews, 
alternately beating their chests and performing series of 
quick little bows, according to the text of their murmured 
prayers. The women, sitting apart in the gallery, looked 
down red-eyed and sobbing. While they mechanically re- 
cited the text, their thoughts roamed the brooding expanse 
of distant Europe, fastened on a brother’s house in Warsaw, 
a daughter married in Vienna, on children and grand- 
children whom they would never see. For there were six 
millions of them caught and writhing in the rapidly tighten- 
ing net between the Dniestr and the Rhine ; and now the 
Government had said that only seventy-five thousand of 
these would be allowed to escape — the rest, if they tried 
to jump, were to be thrown back into the net. 

“ Blessed be the All-present , blessed be He ; blessed who 
gave the Law to His people , blessed be He” 

The aged rabbi conducting the service threw open the 
carved doors of the Holy of Holies at the back of the 
altar. Inside the shrine stood six tall, doll-shaped figures 
clad in heavy velvet tunics with lace embroidery. In place 
of the head each figure showed, emerging from the tunic, 
two pointed sticks hung with small silver bells. The rabbi 
bowed his knee, kissed the hem of the first figure’s velvet 
covering and took it into his arms. After him his aged 
attendants advanced one by one to the shrine, repeated the 
same ceremony and each lifted up one of the figures. Led by 
the rabbi, they formed into a procession and walked in single 
file round the synagogue. The silver bells tinkled thinly 
through the silence and the crowd pressed towards the pro- 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 319 

cession to kiss the figures’ velvet hems ; the women on the 
gallery and those men who could not get close enough blew 
kisses with their finger-tips. When the procession had 
completed its circle, the ram-horn was blown three times 
and the congregation answered in chorus with the traditional 
words. Then the six figures were laid alongside each other 
on the altar and the rabbi and his attendants proceeded to 
undress them. When the bells were dismantled and the 
tunics taken off, each figure was seen to consist of an ancient 
and voluminous parchment scroll. Each scroll contained the 
hand- written text of the five books of Moses ; they had been 
rescued, complete with their traditional velvet drapings and 
silver bells, from burnt-down synagogues in Germany. 
Each parchment was mounted in the traditional way on two 
parallel wooden spools about four feet long. The sticks on 
which the bells hung were the handles of these spools ; by 
turning both in the same direction the parchment was wound 
from one spool to the other and could be read like a moving 
screen. 

The six aged men now proceeded to the altar and read in 
turn one specially selected verse from each of the saved 
scrolls. To find it some had to re- wind twenty or thirty 
yards of parchment, but they did it without hesitation, and 
found the verse with the ease of opening a book at a marked 
page. When the reading was over, the scrolls were dressed 
again and carried once more round the synagogue, the bells 
faintly audible over the sobs of the crowd ; then they were 
replaced in the Holy of Holies and its door was closed. 

There was a silence while the congregation waited for the 
next canonical prayer, as laid down in the rigid rules of the 
service. But instead of intoning it the priest suddenly 
swerved round to face the crowd and, lifting both arms 
above his head, in a thundering voice cried out the words 
of David’s psalm : 

“ Blessed be the Lord my strength , which teacheth my hands 
to war , and my fingers to fight . Bow thy heavens, 0 Lord , and 
come down : touch the mountains , and they shall smoke. Cast 



320 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

forth lightning , and scatter them : shoot out thine arrows , and 
destroy them . Rid me, and deliver me out of great waters, from 
the hand of strange children ; whose mouth speaketh vanity, and 
their hand is falsehood. That our sons may be as plants grown 
up in their youth ; that our daughters may be as the polished 
columns of a palace. . . 

Facing the audience with his arms lifted up and tears 
running down his face, he stood in the pose of the ancient 
High Priests of Israel. Two attendants moved up to him 
from the right and the left, one holding the five-armed 
Maccabean candlestick with the candles aflame, the other a 
printed copy of the White Paper. He took the paper first 
and with a wrathful gesture of his narrow hands tore it up ; 
then held the candles to it and let it go up in flames. 

It was an unorthodox and unheard-of thing to do ; a roar 
broke from the crowd, which, after a few reverberations, 
shaped itself into the old incantation ‘ ‘ Hear, O Israel, the Lord 
is God and God is one They said it thrice ; then, as if 
a miracle had just been performed under their eyes, the 
men in the crowd fell into each other’s arms, shouting and 
crying with joy. 

They left the synagogue comforted, happily convinced 
that now all would be well. They clung to symbols as their 
fathers had done whose faith alone had enabled them to 
survive ; and like their ancestors not so long ago, they 
believed in the power of the symbol to smite Pharaoh’s hosts 
and bring their children and grandchildren safely across 
the sea. 

Proudly carrying their flags and streamers, the other pro- 
cession marched from the football ground to the centre of 
modem Jerusalem ; when they reached Zion Circus they 
were disbanded by their leaders and told to go home. They 
were disappointed with this peaceful anticlimax, for all 
morning they had been exhorted to fight without being told 
whom or how ; but it was luncheon-time and very hot, and 
they were tired and hungry, so they went home without 
demurring. 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 321 

In the afternoon, however, when it became cooler, they 
began to flock back. By five o'clock the crowd had become 
so dense in Zion Circus that all traffic had to be diverted. 

Zion Circus is a white, hot and dusty expanse of asphalt 
at the intersection of the town's main artery, Jaffa Road, with 
the shopping centre of Eliezer Ben Yehuda Street. The 
houses are in concrete or Jerusalem stone, white or sulphur. 
When the sun is high, people without sun-glasses cross it 
with eyes narrowed to slits. There are two cafes and a 
cinema. It is mainly frequented by Hebrews and on this 
day no Moslem ventured near it, except the Arab shoeblacks 
sitting in a row in the narrow shadow of the fagades, and 
using their brushes as drumsticks on their wooden boxes to 
attract customers. 

The crowd shouted slogans and milled round the square 
between the Cafe Europe, Cafe Vienna and Zion Cinema, 
aimless, angry and frustrated. The Police had thrown a 
cordon across Jaffa Road to protect the District Commis- 
sioner's Offices which were about a hundred yards down 
the road from the square, and this provoked the crowd 
whose only aim now became to break through the cordon and 
march to the District Office. They pressed forward, were 
pushed back by the Police and re-formed, more defiant than 
ever. 

By 6 p.m. the Police had to make use of their batons and 
a score of people had to be carried across the square with 
blood-covered faces. This incensed the crowd even more 
and they began to throw stones and bricks at the Police, a 
few of whom were injured. The Police charged. For hours 
they had obeyed the order to stand put and face the jeering 
crowd with restraint ; now they obeyed the order to charge, 
and they let fly. They attacked the crowd in groups, hitting 
out right and left, blind to age or sex, and the screams of 
their victims seemed only to increase their fury. As always 
when the jovial guardians of peace and order are turned 
loose, they were more savage than the mob, for in them 
brutality was paired with a good conscience. Where the 
crowd thinned out towards its fringes, they gave chase to 



322 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

single men and women running for shelter into side streets ; 
but when they succeeded in grabbing one, a ring formed 
round them which tore the screaming victim from their 
hands, and they had to beat their way out of the ring to 
rejoin their panting colleagues. Several of them had their 
uniforms torn to shreds and a few lost their helmets and 
batons to the crowd. 

By 7 p.m. the crowd was smashing shop windows, among 
them those of a German restaurant and a British department 
store in Jaffa Road. The whole square was now a boiling 
cauldron with scuffling groups moving across it like bubbles. 
Then, with the fall of dusk, came a temporary lull. 

The first line of the Police had been broken, but the 
second stood firm, protecting the District Offices. They 
stood astride Jaffa Road at its intersection with a narrow 
side street called Queen Melisande Lane. They were armed 
with rifles, and though so far they had not been ordered to 
make use of them, the ominous dark hole of the muzzles 
kept the front of the crowd at a distance of about fifteen 
yards. Most of them had only arrived in the country a few 
weeks before and were rather bewildered by what they saw. 

Second from the right in the line stood young Constable 
Turner, a fair, good-looking lad from a village in Suffolk. 
Holding his rifle with a firm grip in the at-ease position, 
he looked at the undulating crowd before him with his wide- 
open, slightly bulging eyes. He had never before seen a 
mob behave like that and he did not know what all this 
shouting was about, except that one of the fellows had said 
that the Jews here wanted Independence, and he had added 
that if British rule wasn’t good enough for them, all they 
had to do was to buy their tickets and go home where they 
came from and see whether Hitler was better. That was 
fair enough. Not that he had any grudge against Jews, queer 
fish though they were ; he had known one in the Force, from 
Whitechapel, who had been a very decent, regular fellow. 
And back home in Suffolk on embarkation leave he had 
listened to a sermon by the vicar against Hitler and Race, 
and how the poor blighters had their synagogues burnt 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 323 

down ; so he had arrived in this country with pity for them 
and open-minded like. 

But on the other hand there was what the sergeant had 
said when he had given them a talk after debarkation — a 
regular eye-opener it had been, for the sarge knew what he 
was talking about, what with five years in the country and 
knowing the lingo and the ropes. 

“ You’ll have to look out sharp,” he had said to them, 

“ for this is a hot country. If there is no trouble with 
Johnny Arab, there is trouble with Moishe Jew. Johnny 
Arab is easy enough to get along with but he is excitable like, 
and when he gets excited he does a bit of shooting. He is a 
ripan fighter though, who does most of his shooting in the 
open hills. Moishe Jew is a different customer, all smiles 
into your face but sly. He likes planting time-bombs which 
go off when you don’t expect it, and ambushing in dark 
streets, gangster fashion. He’s also got helpers everywhere. 
Johnny Ajrab is quiet just now, but the Jew has something 
up his sleeve ; so watch your step. . . .” 

Constable Turner had been watching his step ever since, 
and if a Jewish shopkeeper or waiter talked to him, all smiles 
and “ please ” and “ thank you ”, he would just look at him 
and think that he knew what he knew. 

Just now they were all screaming again on the square like 
a lot of monkeys in the Zoo. Having finished with the shop 
windows they were now smashing the telephone-boxes and 
street lamps. One after the other the lamps went out ; then 
there was a flash like from a short-circuit and the rest of the 
lamps went out together. The square was plunged into 
sudden twilight, and as it grew darker the yelling and 
screaming increased. Young Constable Turner confessed 
to himself that he didn’t like it. 

In the first row of the crowd, directly opposite him, 
Turner had remarked an oddly dressed boy with black love- 
locks and black cotton stockings fixed with strings. He was 
pr essin g a velvet bag to his hips, the like of those they 
always carried on their way to the synagogue. The boy 
looked and behaved like a devil, yelling and gesticulating, 



324 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

and jumping up and down. Several times he was pushed 
forward by the pressure of the crowd almost into Turner’s 
arms, and then he elbowed himself back into the crowd, 
but he didn’t seem to be frightened. On the contrary, he was 
pulling faces at Constable Turner. Turner tried to look the 
other way, but for some reason his gaze had always to return 
to the boy’s face. Just now the boy was sticking his tongue 
out at him — there could be no doubt about it though it was 
almost dark — and what with his dangling side-locks framing 
the dark-eyed face, and the long, pointed tongue sticking out, 
it was an ugly sight which almost gave one the creeps. 
Presently the boy started yelling at him, or rather chanting 
something in their lingo which Turner did not understand ; 
nor did he guess that he, Turner, had sung those very same 
words himself, though in translation, back home in church. 
“ Cast forth lightning and scatter them” the boy yelled, 
dancing in a frenzy on his toes, “ shoot out thine arrows , 
and deliver me from the hand of strange children” Turner 
wished he could collar that boy, and give him a good 
shaking maybe, to teach him some manners. But just to 
stand and stare and dodge the stones thrown at you, with 
that grimacing devil under your nose, it kind of got you 
down. Well, that’s how it is, the policeman’s lot, always — 
or nearly. 

Now they’d started singing again, all together — their 
anthem or whatever it was — it sounded as if they meant to 
bring the houses down. And as they sang, they advanced. 
One could not properly see the crowd moving forward from 
the square, but one could see the pressure increase on those 
in front. They tried to hold their place, butting back with 
elbows and buttocks, but the pressure was too strong for 
them and a few lost their balance and fell, squirming on the 
asphalt while others tumbled over them ; there were now 
less than ten yards of open space left and it was almost com- 
pletely dark. Turner squinted at the faces of his fellow 
policemen ; they stood rigid as if the whole show didn’t 
concern them. The mob was throwing stones again, not 
from the front, of course, but from further back where it was 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 325 

safe ; Turner had to dodge a brick which came hurtling at 
him like shrapnel and missed his head by inches. And all 
the while the singing went on — part seemed to do the 
singing, part the throwing ; now it swelled even more and 
there was a new violent push forward. Those in front were 
swept forward by a big wave, the whole dark mass was 
moving ; then there was a shot followed by two others and 
the second man to Turner's right gave out a yell and went 
down in a queer kind of spiralling slow-motion. 

Almost at the same second the sergeant yelled out a 
command and Turner felt his rifle fly upward and dig its butt 
firmly into his shoulder, as if the rifle had obeyed of its own 
accord. The next command followed immediately and 
Turner pulled the trigger — whether he felt regret or relief 
for having been ordered to fire only over the heads of the 
crowd he couldn’t say, for simultaneously with the flash he 
saw a dark and supple mass, like a jumping wild-cat, fly at 
him, and felt a hot stinging pain in his left knuckle. He 
screamed and let go of the rifle ; then he saw as if in a crazy 
dream that the boy with the grimacing devil’s face was 
hanging on to his neck and biting into his knuckle, holding 
fast with his teeth. Crazed with fright and frantically trying 
to wrench his hand free, young Constable Turner suddenly 
remembered the words of the psalm : Deliver me from the 
hand of strange children ; then he lifted his right fist and 
gave the devil a whacking blow on the head. 

The boy tottered and let go, but before Turner could grab 
him some of the mob had torn the boy back, and Turner’s 
rifle had gone too. He looked round with dazed eyes and 
saw that there still was a number of separate skirmishes going 
on in the street, but the mass of the crowd was floating back 
and the cordon had re-formed. The volley had after all had 
its effect, and a minute or so later there were again about 
twenty yards of free space in front. “ Order arms,” the 
sergeant shouted ; but Turner had no longer any arms to 
order. “ I’ll pay them back for this,” he muttered under his 
breath ; then he saw the blood trickling from his hand, and 
reported for permission to fall out. 



326 


THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 


4 

Later in the same night Joseph was walking home to his 
dingy hotel in the Street of the Prophets, chuckling to him- 
self. A week ago the utter futility of this demonstration 
would have filled him with despair ; since the action last 
Friday he did not mind. But how like the Glicksteins that 
this day of days should end in such a contemptible and 
humiliating manner ! Bauman’s organisation had taken no 
part in it ; they believed in action not in demonstrations. 
The official leaders had all made speeches about “ deeds and 
not words ” and “ resistance to the last drop of blood ” ; 
the only thing they had forgotten to say was what deeds 
they expected from the people and what form their resistance 
should take. The crowd, keyed up and then left without a 
lead, had acted under its own confused impulses ; and to- 
morrow the Glicksteins would issue a statement against 
rowdyism and for order and discipline, and everything would 
go on as before. 

Why could the Irish, the Serbs, the Indians with their 
ninety per cent of illiterates, find the proper form and ex- 
pression for their struggle — and this proverbially clever race 
be so utterly helpless every time a disaster befell them ? It 
was not cowardice — the story of each of the Galilean settle- 
ments was an epic in itself. But the nation as a whole had 
lost its self-confidence in the centuries of dispersion. Its 
leaders came from the small towns of Poland and Tsarist 
Russia, where authority was represented by a corrupt police 
sergeant, usually drunk, and where the only way to deal with 
authority was to bribe or cringe. They could argue and 
protest and write brilliant memoranda to the League of 
Nations ; when it came to action the ghetto in their blood 
began to tell, and they were helpless. . . . 

The street was deserted and littered with broken glass. 
As he turned into Jaffa Road, plunged into darkness, he ran 
into a Police patrol armed with tommy-guns. There were 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 327 

two of them and they shouted at him to put his hands up ; 
while one held him at the point of his gun, the other began 
to search him for weapons. Their manner showed that they 
were frightened and expected him to throw a bomb at them 
at any moment ; and this fact filled Joseph, who was un- 
armed, with an ironical satisfaction. “ What’s the matter 
with you two ? ” he asked in English with a careful drawl. 
“ Got the wind up ? ” 

Their manner changed instantly. The one who had been 
patting his pockets stopped doing it, the other lowered the 
barrel of his gun. 

“ Sorry, sir,” he said. “ We are under orders, and 
thought you were a . . .” He looked doubtfully first into 
Joseph’s face, then at his clothes. Accent and appearance 
did not fit and the man looked somewhat puzzled. 

“. . .a Jew ? ” Joseph asked helpfully. 

The policeman became even more confused. 

“ It’s all right, sir, we were only acting according to 
instructions,” he said, 

“ But lama. Jew,” Joseph said, childishly enjoying him- 
self. “ Good night, officer.” 

“ Good night, sir,” said the constable, completely taken 
aback. 

Joseph walked on, grinning in the dark. He had gone 
about a hundred yards before he asked himself what reason 
he had to be so pleased with himself. After all, one couldn’t 
expect the Glicksteins to acquire that certain accent. And 
when all was said he had only got away with being of 
the Race by the fact that he was not entirely of it. . . . He 
suddenly stopped grinning. It struck him that, hypocrisy 
apart, this was the real reason why the Race was persecuted 
in the East but tolerated in the West. They were tolerated 
to the extent that their substance became diluted. No normal 
people could endure the undiluted substance — that extreme 
and exposed condition of life which had crystallised in it. 

Oh, damn, he thought, there we go again. And he had 
believed that since last Friday he had got over this kind of 
thing. Perhaps last Friday night had been just a trifle too 



328 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

easy. The Arab night watchmen on the beach had become 
gentle as lambs once they saw the muzzles of the automatics 
point at them, and the rest had been almost incredibly smooth 
going. The boat had turned up in the deserted bay near 
Natanya only half an hour after the appointed time. Directed 
by Morse signals from torches on the beach, it had anchored 
just outside the shallows so that the lifeboats with the cargo 
had had no more than fifty yards to row. The crates with 
the guns and ammunition had been safely loaded onto the 
milk-trucks within an hour. Most of the two hundred 
passengers were able to wade ashore from the lifeboats them- 
selves ; only the children and some old people, among them 
one with a wooden leg, had to be carried. When they came 
out of the water they all kissed the earth and most of them 
wept. Had they not been firmly told to shut up, they would 
have started singing hymns. Long before dawn they had all 
been put into trucks and dispersed in safe places ; the action 
was over. The night watchmen were found, gagged and tied, 
three hours later by an Arab shepherd in the hills of 
Samaria. . . . 

The only hitch had been that they were unable to finish 
refuelling before daylight came, and just as it was lifting 
anchor for the return journey, the boat had been sighted by 
a coastal patrol launch and seized by the authorities. How- 
ever, they only got the Rumanian captain and his crew, who 
couldn’t give away much as all their dealings had been with 
straw men under assumed names. The old tramper was lost 
— but there were two others on their way with eight hundred 
illegals this time ; and after these there would be yet others 
with fugitives and arms. . . . 

Joseph walked along the dark Jaffa Road, carefully picking 
his way among the broken glass and fragments of bricks. 
Without being aware of it, he was whistling under his breath 
the tune of “ We shall rebuild Galilee ”. Since last Friday 
he felt a changed person — a patient who has undergone a 
magic cure after a long, toxic disease. His only regret was 
that he would not be allowed to take part in any more actions. 
Bauman was firm on that point ; and with Bauman, unlike 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 329 

with Reuben or Moshe, arguing was impossible. On the 
other hand, Bauman had taken him to a certain extent into 
his confidence and had given him certain explanations con- 
nected with last Friday’s action — that is, he had told him 
as much as Joseph ought to know to get the background 
right when he started doing propaganda for them. 

The people and the arms came from various countries, but 
mainly from Poland, via Rumania and Greece. The boats 
were old Greek or Rumanian cattle ships, coastal tramps or 
Turkish smuggler ships which could not be found on Lloyd’s 
register. They had to be chartered by the Organisation’s 
middlemen at a high price to cover the risk of their being 
seized by the British. F or the time being the Organisation had 
plenty of money, mainly from rich American Jews to whose 
imagination this kind of thing appealed more than the sub- 
scription lists of the National Fund for the planting of trees 
or of the Hebrew University for the creation of a chair for 
Mathematics. There was, for instance, a certain Rumanian 
millionaire who had made his money by trafficking in arms and 
who, having lost his daughter in a pogrom of the Iron Guard, 
had given half his fortune to the Organisation on condition 
that it should be used for buying arms. Others gave a fixed 
amount for the smuggling of a fixed number of refugees into 
the country. There were many such sources which the law- 
abiding Glicksteins had never been able to tap. 

The arms came mainly from Poland. The Polish Govern- 
ment was anxious both to get rid of its Jews and to make 
trouble for the British. Official Zionism had been too 
scrupulous to make capital out of this opportunity. The 
Bauman organisation had as few scruples as Mr. Chamber- 
lain’s Government. Its leaders, Raziel and Stem, had gone 
to Warsaw and made contact with a certain branch of the 
Polish General Staff. They had been received with open 
arms and come back with more positive results than they 
had ever expected. The Poles were providing as many Jews 
with passports and were sending as many arms as the 
Organisation could transport. The only difficulty was to find 
ships whose owners were willing to run the risk. For the 

Y 



330 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

time being they could not bring in more than five hundred 
people a month, plus a few tons of arms. But this was only 
the beginning. By the end of the year they hoped to reach 
a monthly five thousand ; and by the end of 1940, if there 
was no war . . . 

“ Boy, oh boy,” Bauman had exclaimed at this point, 
pacing up and down the room, head thrust forward, hands 
in his leather jacket. “ Give me five years and we shall have 
another half-million in, and with it the majority in the 
country. Once we have the majority the rest is easy. Five 
years, man — if they would only wait five years with their 
bloody war, our problem would be solved. ...” He had 
stopped in front of Joseph, looking at him with wild eyes. 

“ Do you think there will be no war until 1944 ? ” he 
asked, putting his hands on Joseph’s shoulder. “ Listen,” 
he went on, talking in a fever, “ we are only just beginning. 
But we have got our start. Man, is it too much to ask for 
five years, having waited for two thousand ? Tell me, is 
that too much ? ” 

He was shaking Joseph by the shoulders. Last Friday’s 
had been the seventh transport to arrive since the Polish 
action had started, and so far all had arrived without a hitch, 
only two ships having been seized after unloading. Bauman 
was wild and drunk with hope. A precarious hope has a 
more unbalancing effect than despair. He suddenly took his 
hands from Joseph’s shoulders and looked at him as if he 
were a stranger. 

“ Dismiss,” he said, for the first time treating Joseph as 
a subordinate. 


5 


It was curious, Joseph reflected as he continued his walk 
towards Zion Circus, now dark and deserted, it was strange 
indeed that political imaginativeness was nowadays only to 
be found among extremist movements of the tyrannical type. 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 331 

Nazis, Fascists and Communists seemed to hold the inter- 
national monopoly of it. It was not due to their lack of 
responsibility, as the envious democracies pretended, for 
these movements remained equally imaginative in their 
methods after they had ascended to power. One would have 
expected that a democratic structure would leave ampler scope 
for the display of originality than these rigidly disciplined 
bodies ; and yet the opposite seemed to be true. Apparently 
submission to discipline and boldness of vision were not as 
incompatible as was generally assumed. Those who denied 
the freedom of ideas were full of ideas and ingenuity ; while 
the defenders of free expression were dull and pedestrian 
with hardly an idea worth expressing. 

— Well, obviously these were symptoms of the political 
ice age. Exposed to temperatures approaching absolute zero 
point, all matter displayed a curious and irregular behaviour. 
Even in physics different laws seemed to operate on different 
climatic levels. . . . 

Joseph heard the bell of an ambulance car coming down 
Ben Yehuda Street, and as he was too keyed up to go to 
bed he decided to have a look at the Hadassa Hospital, just 
off Jaffa Road, to get an idea how many people had been 
injured in the day’s riots. He turned back, and after a few 
yards turned into the steep, narrow side street leading to the 
hospital. As he approached the old drab building he saw 
that there was already quite a crowd — all anxious relatives, 
and all arguing at the same time with the British policeman 
and the Hebrew nurse guarding the entrance gate. The 
harassed nurse kept disappearing into the building to inquire 
about the names given to her, and the constable tried to 
persuade the crowd to form a queue, but without success. 
They kept on pushing towards the gate and shouting over 
each other’s heads whenever the nurse came back ; the nurse 
kept plugging her two thumbs into her ears, yelling at them 
to keep quiet and to speak one at a time. Joseph watched 
the scene with disgust — a homely disgust which he ex- 
perienced at least once a day when watching similar scenes 
at bus stops and office counters. As usual he told himself 



332 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

that these people acted under the pressure of their past. 
He had trained his mind to apologise for what his senses 
perceived ; but it had little power over that momentary 
revulsion which was also a pressure-product of his own past 
and couldn’t be helped, just as the crowd’s reactions couldn’t. 

He turned to go home when he noticed the boy with the 
love-locks whom Bauman had slapped, coming out of the 
gate. The boy had a bandage round his head but wore his 
skull-cap and the greasy black felt hat on top of it ; he was 
smiling uncertainly with his thick lips and held the blue 
velvet bag pressed under his arm. It occurred to Joseph that 
members of the Organisation had been forbidden to take part 
in last afternoon’s demonstrations so as not to expose them- 
selves unnecessarily, and that the boy had no business to get 
mixed up in a scrap. He waited until the boy had got clear 
of the crowd and was walking down the street, then caught 
up with him. “ What have you been doing there ? ” he 
asked. 

The boy gave a start, then recognised Joseph and smiled, 
reassured. He had only seen Joseph twice in the Palace, and 
though he didn’t know what or who Joseph was, he knew 
by instinct that he was a kind of outsider, not part of the 
hierarchy of his superior officers, and therefore safe. 

“ Ooh — I have been hit by a policeman,” he said in a 
triumphant sing-song. “ But I took his rifle away.” 

“ Did you ? ” said Joseph. “ Just like that ? ” 

“ No — I bit him in the ha-and.” 

It was too dark to see the expression in the boy’s face. 
In his sagging black cotton stockings and the long black 
kaftan he looked like a scarecrow. 

“ You know you had no business to go there,” said 
Joseph. “ And particularly not carrying that . . . .” He 
rapped with his fingers on the bag under the boy’s arm. “ If 
they had caught you, you would have got yourself into a 
bad mess — and others too.” 

The boy opened the bag and pulled the book out of it. 
They were close to a street lamp which had been out of the 
crowd’s reach, and he held it up to the light. It was an 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 333 

ordinary, tattered prayer-book. “ What is wrong with tha-at 
if they caught me ? ” he asked mockingly. “ I was on my 
way to the synago-ogue. What is wrong with going to the 
synago-ogue ? ” 

Joseph gave no answer. He hated meddling, but he had 
made up his mind to mention the matter to Bauman or 
Simeon. The boy was stuffing the book into the bag. They 
were standing near a hoarding plastered with posters from 
the eve. The ornate, loud-mouthed protests and threats of 
the official Hebrew bodies were torn and smeared with 
caricatures. On the heavy-lettered slogan “ To the Last 
Drop of Blood ”, quoted from a speech by Glickstein, the 
word “ blood ” was crossed out and replaced by “ ink ”. 
Another poster with the words “ If I Forget Thee, Jeru- 
salem ” had been half tom off, so that the words were 
hanging upside-down showing the dry glue on the back of 
the paper. 

The boy was looking at the posters in the dim light of 
the street lamp. Joseph could see him smile mockingly. He 
was curious to find out what went on in the boy’s head. 

“ What do you think of all this ? ” he asked. 

The boy lifted his shoulders. 

“ Do I know ? ” he said. “ It is written : A wolf in a 
sheep’s skin is a great danger, but a sheep in a wolf’s skin is 
an object of laughter.” 

“ Where is that written ? ” asked Joseph. 

The boy smiled, twisting his side-plaits round his finger. 

“ You have made it up,” said Joseph, and for the first time 
the boy was not entirely repulsive to him. “ Why have you 
joined the Organisation ? ” he asked. 

Again the boy shrugged. “ Why not ? ” he answered in 
a sing-song, with his half-humble, half-superior infant- 
prodigy smile. Somewhere beneath his cringing and 
gaucherie that boy was quite sure of himself, or of some- 
thing encased in the very core of himself. It was as if he 
accepted the awkwardness of his own body and manners as 
something of no consequence, as a mere accident which 
could not touch that inner certainty. 



334 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ Can’t you answer properly ? ” Joseph said. The boy 
reluctantly turned away from the hoarding and faced him. 
Under his black kaftan he wore a white, soiled, cotton shirt 
buttoned up to the neck but without a tie. Instead of a 
stud the shirt had a white thread-button which was broken, 
showing its wire frame. His face, between the two spiral 
braids hanging down to his shoulders, still had the bi-sexed 
ambiguity of adolescents and the coarser cherubim. His 
eyes and lips were moist, and the lips always moving. 

“ Why do you ask a question to which you know the 
answer yourself ? ” he chanted, with a certain hostility. 

“ Because your reasons may be different from mine,” said 
Joseph. “ Well, why have you joined ? ” 

“ Ooh,” the boy complained. “ They have asked me that 
at each of the tests.” 

A camel rocked past them, occupying with its load 
almost the whole width of the lane. They had to flatten 
themselves against the wall. The Arab, riding on a heap of 
sacks, was asleep. The camel passed them with measured 
sullenness, its hooves whirling up a cloud of dust as it 
reached the unpaved end of the lane. 

“ And what did you say when they asked you ? ” Joseph 
pressed the boy. It had become of a sudden importance to 
him to know what the reasons were which had got him and 
this boy into the same boat. 

“ What I said ? I gave them Exodus twenty-one, and 
Deuteronomy nineteen-one and nineteen-twenty-one and 
twenty-five-nineteen and thirty-two-forty-three. . . .” 

“ Meaning ? ” Joseph asked ; but already his curiosity 
was extinguished. 

“ Meaning,” said the boy, with mocking triumph in his 
voice, “ meaning : Blot out the remembrance of Amalek 
from under heaven. Thine eye shall not pity, but life shall 
go for life. I will render vengeance to mine enemies and will 
reward them that hate me. I will make mine arrows drunk 
with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh. . . .” 

He had begun hopping up and down on one foot, clapping 
his hands, his side-locks flapping round his ears. He looked 



THE DAY OF VISITATION 335 

like a big clumsy child in an outgrown coat skipping a rope. 

Joseph watched him with fascinated disgust. “ That will 
do,” he said. 

“ Now you know,” said the boy, coming to rest. His eyes 
resumed their former expression of timid mockery. In a 
different voice he said, as if trying to comfort Joseph : 

“ It is also said : In much wisdom there is much grief ; 
he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow. And how 
dieth the wise man ? as the fool.” 

He made a deep, mocking bow at Joseph and made off 
in a hurry, hop-skipping along like a schoolboy, his side-locks 
flapping, the velvet bag tightly pressed under his arm. 

It was almost morning, and the sky a transparent, silky 
grey, preparing for the sun to rise over Mount Zion. 

“ There goes your undiluted substance,” Joseph thought, 
following the boy with his eyes. 




THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 
(i939) 


“ To have one’s heart with God is not the same thing as 
having one’s head in the clouds.” 

(The Rev. Father P. N. Waggett, S.S J.E., 
in a sermon on the Mount of Olives, 1918) 




THIEVES IN THE NIGHT (1939) 


1 

In May the sky over Ezra’s Tower is a blue lava field. The 
earth looks as if Jehovah had thrown a carpet down on 
Galilee ; the air-bubbles caught under the carpet are the 
hills, and the creases the wadis. Seen from Kfar Tabiyeh, 
the red-roofed white houses of the Settlement look like a 
colony of mushrooms spreading over an ever wider area of 
the hill. There were five and twenty on the Dogs’ Hill 
when they came, and now after two years there were almost 
three hundred. And the God of the Hebrews had blessed 
their cattle and multiplied their flocks. 

The happiest days for Joseph during this spring of 1939 
were the Fridays and Shabbaths he spent at home. Ezra’s 
Tower was a lotus-land untouched by the gales of the ice 
age which were shaking the world with increasing fury. He 
had fallen in love with the hills all over again, and he had 
a theory that the Song was written by Solomon during a 
Galilean spring-excursion. Its counterpart, the sermon of 
vanities, was a product of the glum hills of Judaea where the 
royal pessimist resided ; but the Song clearly belonged to 
Galilee : 

. . . The fig tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines 
with the tender grape give a good smell ; take us the foxes , the 
little foxes , that spoil the vines . 

The world was invaded by the barking little foxes, but 
Ezra’s Tower still held its own. The saplings which Simeon 
had planted threw their lattice of thin shadows on the grass 
as a token of the future forest’s shade. It was curious that 
the memory of Simeon’s sharp, bitter personality should 
survive in the form of this baby forest of firs. Simeon the 



340 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

heretic was dead to the Commune, but already a different, 
legendary Simeon grew in the forest’s roots. And in the 
minds of those who had come after her death there was a 
mythical Dina, an image of purity and perfection from the 
early legendary days. 

With the growth of the Commune its fraternal homo- 
geneity had transformed itself into a more articulate structure. 
As in a mature organic cell there was now a clear distinction 
between core and periphery. The periphery was made up 
of concentric layers according to their age, though the 
division between neighbouring layers became blurred with 
time. But the core retained its peculiarity and distinction. 
They were the founders, the Old Ones : Reuben, Moshe, 
Dasha, Ellen, Arieh the shepherd, Mendl the Pied Piper; 
Sarah, who since Dina’s death was in charge of the Children’s 
House ; Max, who was still in the opposition. At the last 
General Meeting most of them had been re-elected to the 
administrative posts they held, and though the Secretariat 
contained some new blood from the outer layers, it was easy 
to foresee that for the next few years they would continue 
to monopolise all key positions — until the periphery, in 
growing frustration, produced its own leaders, and captured 
the Secretariat in turn. This was how it had happened in 
the older Communes, and the same would doubtless happen 
in Ezra’s Tower. The absence of privileges for the bureau- 
cracy prevented its crystallisation ; they had no army, 
police or party apparatus to support them, their actions down 
to the minutest detail were under constant public scrutiny, 
and the principle of total economic equality, outlawing 
money and barter, made it impossible for them to bestow 
favours or bribe the electorate. Their only satisfactions were 
increased responsibility, a more direct influence on the de- 
velopment of the Commune, and the sensation of power 
derived from it. It was but the shadow of power, without 
substance and stability, and yet for those who yielded it real 
enough to be cherished more than they were prepared to 
admit, even to themselves. The instinct to dominate had 
not been abolished, merely tamed and harnessed ; but that, 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 341 

Joseph thought, was as much as anybody could hope for. 

Of course, the model society of the Commune was limited 
both in size and by the necessary selection of its human 
material. Repeated on a large scale and by compulsory 
means it was bound to collapse. Oases are not expandable. 
But it had proved that under certain conditions a different 
form of human life could be attained ; and that again was as 
much as one could hope for. . . . 

On this particular Friday, the last in May, Joseph was 
lying in the field near the Ancestor’s Cave under the blue lava 
sky, chewing a grass halm. On his way back from Jerusalem 
he had been to see Ellen and the child in the maternity clinic 
at Gan Tamar. She had looked very happy and almost 
pretty in the white bed with the red poppies on the bedside 
table. Joseph had brought them, and she had been so 
grateful and overjoyed that he in turn had felt moved by a 
mixture of pity, fondness, physical desire and the guilt of 
not being able to feel more for her. However, if one did not 
analyse this mixture too closely, it could almost pass for the 
real thing. And what, after all, was the real thing ? So 
many emotional compounds passed under that name, that 
this one might claim it as well as any other. Who knew 
whether what he felt for Dina was more real ? Perhaps 
if Ellen had been the unattainable one and Dina the 
mother of the child, his feelings, too, would have been 
reversed. 

Anyway, the child was a girl and it was to be called Dina. 
It had been Ellen’s suggestion, and it was one of those things 
about Ellen which went into the compound and made it 
more solid and adhesive. 

— Leaning on his elbow and chewing the sweet halm of 
grass, he saw Reuben strolling towards him. Reuben had 
grown even more quiet and self-effacing during this last 
year ; he for one was immune against the temptations of 
power. Or was he ? What if his reserve and modesty were 
only a subtler, inverted means of deriving satisfaction from 
it ? Oh, the fallacy of those simple words which people used 
to describe each other, as if the qualities expressed by them 



342 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

were irreducibles and not highly complicated mixtures ! 
“ Modesty ” was believed to be an irreducible element like 
nitrogen ; and lo, neither of them were. . . . 

“ How does it feel to be a father ? ” Reuben asked, 
settling in the grass at Joseph’s side in the relaxed, lazy 
mood of the Shabbath eve which descended over the whole 
Commune after the traditional hot shower-bath. 

“ God knows,” said Joseph. “ I was just trying to work 
it out. I am busy convincing myself that there is no cause 
for loin-pride, that the fact that the thing was born with 
some fluff on its head is no merit of mine, and that others 
have equally small pink nails on their fingers and toes, the 
opening and closing of which is a rhythmical reflex and no 
certain sign of early genius.” 

Reuben smiled. “ What a rabbi you are,” he said. 
“ Your thinking proceeds in a kind of mirror-writing — 
from right to left like the Hebrew letters. Sometimes you 
give the impression that you live altogether in a mirror.” 

“ And what of it ? ” said Joseph. “ People shoot them- 
selves in front of mirrors and make love before mirrors. 
It is an old prejudice to think that self-awareness destroys 
the power for emotion, and that feeling must be dumb and 
innocent. The dog while eating enjoys himself, but he 
doesn’t know that he enjoys himself, otherwise he would eat 
slower and leave the best bits to the last ; and thus by lack 
of self-awareness enjoys himself less. * Innocence ’ means 
the opposite of nocentem , hurt. To be nocent is more human, 
and it hurts more. . . .” 

“ Go on, rabbi Joseph, I am listening. Where does the 
chosen race come in ? ” 

Reuben was in an unusually happy mood. The reason 
was that to-night a new settlement was to be founded in the 
District, and that Ezra’s Tower was to serve as godfather to 
the new colonists, as Gan Tamar had once served to them. 
The trucks with the new settlers and their equipment had 
arrived in the morning, and to-night there would be a cele- 
bration before they set out. 

Joseph turned over on his belly. He grinned at Reuben 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 343 

with an affection that was increased by the fact that he was 
now hiding half his existence from him — the half connected 
with Bauman and the gang. But then, did not a well- 
meaning cheat always increase affection ? Husbands never 
felt more affectionate than after the casual adultery so indis- 
pensable for happily balanced matrimony. Which went to 
prove that sincerity was just another compound, like 
affection. 

“ Where the chosen race comes in ? ” he repeated. “ I 
will tell you a parable. Once upon a time the most perfect 
product of creation were the fish. They were swimming 
happily the seven seas, and apart from the occasional accident 
of being eaten by the bigger ones, all was well with them. 

“ Then came the time when some force drove some fish 
to creep ashore and become amphibious. Those who did 
had a terrible time of it. Instead of drifting with stream- 
lined grace through the water, they had to waddle and wobble 
painfully on their bellies through swamp and muck, and 
gasp piteously for air with a new and imperfect contraption 
specially evolved for this purpose. It took ages until these 
new, ugly, awkward creatures began to appreciate the 
compensations for their debasement and sufferings : the 
sun, sound and form, copulation, hot rocks and cool 
winds.” 

“ Is that all ? ” said Reuben. “ Where do the Jews come 
in ? Did the amphibians get circumcised ? ” 

“ Don’t you see ? ” said Joseph. “ The Arabs are the 
fish. They are happy, they have tradition and beauty and 
self-sufficiency and lead a timeless, care-free, lackadaisical 
life. Compared to them we are the graceless amphibians. 
That’s one of the reasons why the English love them and 
dislike us. It is not political. It is their nostalgia for the 
lost paradise — a kind of eternal week-end — and their 
detestation of the 8.35 to the City. For behold, we are the 
force that drives the fishes ashore, the nervous whip of 
evolution.” 

“ That was beautiful, rabbi Joseph,” Reuben said, 
smiling. 



344 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

“ It was merely a digression to settle, once and for all, 
this irksome Arab question, 1 ” said Joseph modestly. “ How- 
ever, in my present happy mood I can’t be bothered with 
Arabs and shall return to my original text, which is con- 
cerned with that mirror-writing of the mind that occurs on 
the higher levels of self-awareness. I wish to point out to 
you that it is sheer philistine nonsense to associate intro- 
spection with morbidity. Cogito ergo sum is the classic 
introspective statement which started modern philosophy 
and shaped our attitude to life. The theme-song of all 
evolution is the trend towards greater articulateness. Romeo 
loves as passionately as your dumb Arab shepherd, but his 
emotion has become articulate and introspected, and is there- 
fore on a higher level. It has become nocent — that is, both 
its hurt and its bliss are sharpened, have a finer and keener 
edge. But that is just the opposite of morbidity. It means 
one rung up the ladder of living.” 

Reuben smiled. “ If I am not mistaken, I once heard 
you rave against the * curse of knowingness 9 on our race. 
And there was a time when you admired Bauman’s terrorists 
who refuse to see the other side of the medal.” 

Joseph looked at him, rather taken aback for a second. 
“ What a snake in the grass you are,” he said. “ In fact there 
is no contradiction — except the old one that you have to 
use your fist to protect your block in which the thinking takes 
place ; which paradox is not of my making but inherent in 
the human condition and particularly noticeable in a moral 
ice age. You pacifists have always to drop your principles 
in an emergency because you refuse to acknowledge that 
basic antinomy of nature. Keep your gun oiled and your 
mirror clean. There is no contradiction in that.” 

“ Well, well,” said Reuben, rising to his feet. “ I liked 
your parable better. ... I must be getting back. Come 
along, Moshe is waiting with the accounts. He wants to kiss 
you for getting the cash advance from the Co-operative. 
That certainly was a triumph of your articulateness. . . .” 

Joseph sighed, but got to his feet obediently. They 
walked back together, discussing the preparations for the 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 345 

evening. Joseph had decided to go out with the settlers* 
convoy to the new Place to-night and come back with the 
returning lorries the next day. Reuben, too, would have liked 
to go, but he had a meeting of the Education Committee on 
the Shabbath morning. Joseph pitied him. 

“ I wonder whether we shall ever grow out of this 
meetingitis, ,, he said. “ It’s the measles of democracy/* 

“ But harmless/* said Reuben. “ Fascist pox isn*t/* 
Joseph, for a change, agreed. Amicable, they discussed 
the location of the new cowshed and the extensions to the 
Children’s House which had become too small for its thirty- 
seven inmates — and, with Joseph’s daughter, thirty-eight. 


2 

As a send-off for the advance party of the new settlers, a 
special meal had been prepared in the dining-hut. The 
tables had been put together to form a long double horseshoe 
covered with a white tablecloth and decorated with flowers ; 
the hut was transformed into a solemn banqueting-hall. 
This happened only three or four times a year, on the eve 
of Passover, on New Year’s Day, at the Feasts of the Macca- 
beans and of the Planting of Trees. In the monotony of 
communal routine the white, glittering tables and the festive 
atmosphere were highlights of the season whose memory 
lingered on for weeks. 

The advance party consisted of only twelve people — 
eleven boys, and one girl called Rachel who seemed to play 
an important role among them. She was very short, under 
five feet, with short-cropped black hair, quick movements, 
and such a high-voltage charge about her dominating little 
person that one was afraid to touch her lest one got an 
electric shock. She came from Rumania, and her boy friend, 
who was secretary of the group, from Germany. His name 
was Theo ; he was blond and tall, with an awkward stoop, 
timid and slow in gesture. He was obviously the ideal 

z 



346 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

type for a communal secretary, a lightweight junior edition 
of Reuben ; what he lacked in vitality Rachel would 
supply. The two of them sat together at the top part of the 
banqueting-table between Moshe and old Wabash, who 
never missed an opportunity to be present at the founding 
of a new settlement. 

There were few Helpers this time and only a small 
advance party, partly because the Arabs had been calmed by 
the White Paper, and had left the rioting for a change to the 
Jews, and mainly because the advance party was for some 
time to live in an abandoned Arab house which stood on the 
site of the future Settlement and would give them reasonable 
protection while they prepared the ground for the main 
group, to follow a few weeks later. The Settlement was to 
be called Tel Joshua, or Joshua’s Hill ; it was to be built 
on a hill at twelve miles’ distance from Ezra’s Tower and to 
serve as a strategic link between the Upper Galilean Com- 
munes and the Valley of Jezreel. The land had been bought 
by the National Fund a few years ago but had been thought 
unfit for colonisation as it had no water, which had to be 
carried on donkeys from a place four miles away. This 
group of fifty young people, recent arrivals from Germany 
and Rumania, still at the bottom of the queue for land, had 
applied for Joshua’s barren hill, and after a long struggle with 
the Hebrew Colonisation Department, had got their way. 
They had left Europe much later than the crowd of Ezra’s 
Tower, and their load of Things to Forget was accordingly 
heavier and more lurid in detail. Half of them had arrived 
without a visa ; they were illegal immigrants with faked 
papers, liable to be deported if caught. They did not care 
how long they had to bore until they found water, nor about 
the malaria rate ; these were trifles compared with the things 
they had experienced where they came from. They were 
hungry for land, hungry for stability, hungry for the smell 
of cattle-sheds, of donkeys and horses ; hungry above all 
for a life that made sense, sustained by the warmth of a 
fraternity where every boy and girl had been tested, was 
liked and approved. 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 347 

The dining-hall was bright, looked much brighter than 
usual with the light reflected from the white tablecloth ; it 
smelled of the fresh salad and herbs in the big wooden bowls 
and was saturated with that convivial buzz produced by the 
vibration of plates, voices and glasses. There were speeches ; 
old Wabash, white-bearded and blue-shirted and looking 
more than ever like a slightly gaga Prophet from the Bible, 
told with gusto the tale of the first Twelve in Dagania and 
of the suffering milliohnim ; he was followed by Moshe dis- 
pensing some good horse-sense advice to the new settlers, 
and by Max with quotations from Glickstein and Lenin. 
But except for the awestricken and solemn debutants of Tel 
Joshua nobody paid much attention to the speeches. As on 
each of the rare occasions when they drank wine, the people 
of Ezra's Tower revealed themselves in a light normally 
dulled by routine and fatigue. When they put their emptied 
glasses down on the white tablecloth with a show of 
recklessness, their faces shone like mirrors from the lumber- 
room with the cobwebs and dust wiped off. 

Joseph's gaze travelled the round of faces of the old guard 
trying to discover the changes they had undergone since that 
night when they had set out for Ezra's Tower. Moshe had 
grown fatter, with a touch of baldness, and looked a little 
like a successful stockbroker. Hunchbacked little Mendl 
had grown even quieter, the listening look in his eyes had 
become more pronounced, and his sudden transformations 
into the Pied Piper rarer ; he had recently finished his 
Galilean Symphony and there was some talk of the National 
Philharmonic Orchestra producing it. Gaby, the communal 
Messalina now in charge of the dressmaker shop, was be- 
ginning to develop a puffed and tartish look ; instead of 
fluttering her eyelashes as she once used to, she had now 
taken up quivering nostrils. Six months ago she had caused 
another scandal by being unfaithful to the Egyptian — and, 
of all people, with the Dr. Phil. Ham, the dark savage, 
had threatened to kill poor Fritz and could only be dissuaded 
from it by the whole matter being thrashed out in the 
General Meeting, where Max had delivered a much-admired 



348 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

speech on sex and society, Gaby had cried, Fritz publicly 
confessed his unsocial behaviour, and Ham, moved almost 
to tears, had solemnly forgiven them all and was stopped 
just in time by Sarah from singing the Anthem. After that, 
Sarah had used her pedagogic talents to comfort the Egyptian 
by opening spiritual vistas for him, and three weeks later the 
Egyptian had suggested that they should get married and live 
together on a higher plane. Sarah had made a terrible fuss, 
asking each member of the Secretariat separately for advice 
and accusing herself of being unfair to poor Gaby. Ham 
got so ashamed of his base desires that he told Sarah he was 
ready to renounce her and to agree with her higher view of 
the matter, whereupon Sarah got hysterics, and it had taken 
all of Reuben’s diplomacy to bring the affair to a happy 
conclusion. 

Almost from the first week they were married, a change 
began to occur in Sarah. Her pinched little face with the 
hungry-virgin eyes began to fill up into matronly softness 
and she put on weight at a fantastic rate. Since Dina’s death 
she had been in charge of the Children’s House but without 
being officially confirmed in her office — all major decisions 
resting with a committee of three — and this had been the 
second great frustration in Sarah’s life. Three months after 
her marriage Reuben had proposed to the General Meeting 
that the committee should be reduced to an advisory capacity 
and Sarah be made a member of the Secretariat with full 
responsibilities. The meeting, though with some doubts and 
hesitations, had voted for the proposal, and this had completed 
Sarah’s transformation from a skinny, frustrated little squirrel 
into a rotund and efficient matron. It had taken her seven 
bitter years of detours and self-deceptions to find the form 
of life she was made for ; but at last she had found it. In 
the world outside, without the sustaining warmth of comrade- 
ship around her, she would probably have gone to pieces. . . . 

Becoming conscious of Joseph’s gaze, Sarah turned her 
head. He gave her a friendly grin and continued his silent 
survey of the old guard. Dasha, fat and pretty with her 
round face and high Slavonic cheekbones, was just coming 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 349 

back from the kitchen, flushed and triumphant at the success 
of the meal. Arieh the shepherd was chewing his shashlik 
in contented rumination ; the Dr, Phil, was holding forth 
on the merits of bootmaking to an admiring girl from the 
youth camp. He, too, had lost his nervous fidgetiness and 
looked broader and more self-assured. Joseph contrasted in 
his mind’s eye the men and women around him with the 
crowd in the cafes of Tel Aviv, the crowd with the frozen 
shrug about their shoulders, and he felt a deep satisfaction, 
a conceitless pride which was close to humbleness, at being 
one of the founders of Ezra’s Tower. This was right and 
good and made sense. Here something broken was being 
made whole again : men were recovering their lost integrity. 

His eyes met Reuben’s, and Reuben gave his snake-in- 
the-grass smile and said : “ Speech Joseph shook his 
head but others had heard, and a minute later the whole 
table was clamouring for a speech. It came almost as a shock 
to Joseph that, despite his unbalancedness and contradictions 
and the sense of his own futility, these people liked him. 
As he stood before them and they looked at him with 
curiosity and expectation, the mirror in his mind revolved 
and he asked himself how he, always unable to see himself as 
a whole, was reflected in their eyes. Oh, well, they would just 
see the old monkey face with one or two grey strands over 
the temples, eyebrows meeting in the middle and lifted in the 
usual grin. He decided to tell them the parable of the fish. 

“ Chaverim he said, savouring the mellow archaic taste 
of the word, born in the hard desert, which had given a new 
turn to the history of man ; “ chaverim — comrades . . 


5 


The engine roared and the truck swayed like a drunkard as 
the convoy entered the dry stream-bed of the wadi. They 
had passed the Giant’s Buttocks and were now following the 
wadi’s course towards the south, away from the familiar 



350 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

country of Ezra’s Tower and Gan Tamar, into new, strange 
hills, deserted but for a few wretched mud villages perching 
on the slopes of desolation. In front and behind, the other 
trucks crept cautiously forward with dimmed headlights. 

Joseph lay stretched out on the canvas cover of the truck, 
his arms folded under his head. This time he had a truck 
all to himself, for there were few Helpers needed. It was a 
comfortable one, loaded with crates of farm implements and 
some sacks of flour on top. 

On the truck in front the new settlers were singing “ God 
will rebuild Galilee ”. On the truck behind, which carried 
some of the Helpers, they were arguing over the White 
Paper. As the truck of the Helpers came closer or fell back, 
Joseph caught fragments of the debate and lost it again, 
while the singing in front swelled and faded. The stars over 
his head displayed all their Galilean brilliance, the Great 
Bear sprawling on his back and the Milky Way clotted into 
a luminous, branching scar. 

The truck behind was pulling close again. They were 
still arguing. A girl’s voice said : 

“ Once we have irrigated the southern desert we can 
bring another four millions in.” 

“ That still leaves twelve millions out,” a man said. 

" It doesn’t matter,” said the girl. “ Half of them will 
be killed anyway. The other half will be all right for a 
while. „ . .” 

The truck receded, but the girl’s voice lingered on in 
Joseph’s ear : “ Half will be killed, the other half will be all 
right for a while.” She had said it as soberly as if checking 
a household account. What a grandiose arithmetic history 
had taught this race. Their population chart, instead of 
moving in a curve, looked like the zigzag of lightning. 

The truck gave a jolt and slowed down ; the singing in 
front became weaker, and from the truck behind came once 
more the girl’s voice arguing in the dark : 

. . Nationalism ? Nonsense. It’s homesickness.” 

“ How can people be homesick for a country they have 
never seen ? ” said a man’s sceptical voice. 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 351 

“ It’s in the race. Homesickness is endemic in the 
race. . . 

Joseph’s truck accelerated and the rest of the argument 
was lost. How they always harked back to this question of 
“ race ” — as if it explained anything. As if some biological 
variation could explain this phenomenon of the lightning 
zigzag trace of their fate — that jagged scar across the face 
of human history. 

He lay back on the canvas, glad to have the truck to 
himself. To the south he saw a very bright planet, perhaps 
Mars or Jupiter, he didn’t know. He remembered that first 
night, walking back after the shooting to Dina’s tent, when 
he had seen this same planet rising, and had decided that if 
other stars were populated they must doubtless have their 
own kind of Jews. For Jews were not an accident of race, 
but simply man’s condition carried to its extreme — a branch 
of the species touched on the raw. Exiled in Egypt, in 
Babylon, and now over the whole globe, exposed to strange 
and hostile surroundings, they had to develop peculiar traits ; 
they had no time nor chance to grow that hide of com- 
placency, of a specious security, which makes man insensitive 
to and forgetful of the tragic essence of his condition. They 
were the natural target of all malcontents, because they were 
so exasperatingly and abnormally human. . . . 

Made homeless in space, they had to expand into new 
dimensions, as the blind develop hearing and touch. The 
loss of the spatial dimension transformed this branch of the 
species as it would have transformed any other nation on 
earth, Jupiter or Mars. It turned their vision inwards. It 
made them cunning and grew them claws to cling on with 
as they were swept by the wind through countries that were 
not theirs. It increased their spiritual arrogance : deprived 
of Space, they believed themselves chosen for eternity in 
Time. It increased the protective adaptability of their 
surface, and petrified their inner core. Constant friction 
polished their many facets : reduced to drift-sand, they had 
to glitter if they wanted to avoid being trodden on. Living 
in bondage, cringing became second nature to their pride. 



352 THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 

Their natural selector was the whip : it whipped the life 
out of the feeble and whipped the spasm of ambition into 
the fit. In all fields of living, to get an equal chance they 
had to start with a plus. Condemned to live in extremes, 
they were in every respect like other people, only more so. 

— A nationalist ? I ? — Joseph echoed the girl’s voice. 
— Nonsense. Our nationalism is homesickness for norm- 
ality. 

The singing swelled up, receded. They were singing 
one of the popular horras, a folk-song with a passionate, 
almost hysterical tune. 

— Nationalism ? Nonsense ... — Joseph repeated to 
himself. — This earth means something different to us than 
Croatia means to the Croats or America to the Americans. 
They are married to their countries ; we are searching for a 
lost bride. We are homesick for a Canaan which was never 
truly ours. That is why we are always foremost in the race 
for utopias and messianic revolutions, always chasing after 
a lost Paradise. Defeated and bruised, we turn back towards 
the point in space from which the hunt started. It is the 
return from delirium to normality and its limitations. A 
country is the shadow which a nation throws, and for two 
thousand years we were a nation without a shadow. . . . 

The wadi narrowed to a gorge ; the starlit rocks on its 
flanks seemed to meditate the law of universal indifference. 
The convoy moved along them, a dark caravan of pilgrims. 
On setting out on their long pilgrimage they had left a house 
and garden behind ; all that had been swallowed up by the 
desert and now they had to start building again. They were 
returning to a Canaan of thistles and thorns. Half of them 
were illegal immigrants : they survived without official 
consent. How those with the complacent hides and solid 
shadows grudged them even this waste of scrub and stones ! 

— Ay, don’t give in to bitterness, Joseph told himself ; oil 
your gun but keep your mirror clean. We shall always be 
betrayed because something in us asks to be betrayed. 
There is this urge in us for the return to earth and normality ; 
and there is that other urge to continue the hunt for a lost 



THIEVES IN THE NIGHT 353 

Paradise which is not in space. This is our predicament. 
But it is not a question of race. It is the human predicament 
carried to its extreme. 

Far off in the night a light had begun to blink ; it looked 
like a red spark suspended in the air. Straining his eyes, 
Joseph discovered the pale silhouette of the hill on which Tel 
Joshua was to stand. 

— Good, Joseph thought. We have occupied another 
acre of space. The hunt will go on and the stakes will keep 
burning, but a few hundred will live here ; and the wilder- 
ness shall be glad for them. 

The truck stopped abruptly. The whole convoy came to 
a standstill ; the drivers switched their headlights on and 
hooted wildly into the night. The distant spark went 
rhythmically on and off, flash and darkness, flash, flash and 
darkness, flash and flash, dot and dash. 

— They have gone crazy, Joseph thought, reading the 
message. They are sending Isaiah in Morse : 

And they shall build houses and inhabit them; and they 
shall plant vineyards , and eat the fruit of them . 

— They should send it in code, Joseph thought. It is a 
subversive message, opposed to official policy and against 
the law. 

The truck had started to move again. The argument in 
the truck behind continued. The drivers, sobered, dimmed 
their lights and the convoy resumed its journey, stealthily 
like thieves in the night. 


THE END 